---
title: 100R — uxn
url: https://100r.co/site/uxn.html
site_name: lobsters
fetched_at: '2025-08-12T23:07:13.419606'
original_url: https://100r.co/site/uxn.html
date: '2025-08-12'
tags: osdev
---

# uxn

The Uxn/Varvara ecosystem is apersonal computing stackbased on asmall virtual machinethat lies at the heart of our software, and that allows us to run the same application on a variety of systems.

It is designed with animplementation-firstmindset and is tailored to our specific needs for hosting graphical applications, but is entirely open and welcomes anyone to adopt it as a release target. Uxn is programmable in its own uniquelanguage, and the distribution of Uxn programs is akin to sharing game roms for classic console emulators, to learn more, see our notes onuxn design.

### Desktop Versions

To run Uxn programs, you will need an emulator that works on your system. Below are links to emulators for major operating systems, and for a moreobscure environments. Alternatively, you can alsoimplement your ownby looking a theVM specsand theIO specs.

Linux/BSD

Windows/Mac/Plan9

If you need a hand getting started, join us on #uxn onirc.libera.chat, or theCatlang Discord. Once equipped with an emulator, you can pick among thesetoys, games and tools, write your own programs or try ours:

* Oquonie, a bizzare universe
* Donsol, a card dungeon crawler
* Left, our text editor
* Noodle, a drawing program
* Orca, the livecoding environment
* Nasu, a sprite editor
* Turye, a font editor
* Catclock, a desktop clock
* Dexe, a hex editor
* Bicycle, an interactive REPL

## uxn guide

The same Uxn rom can be used on a variety ofdesktop computers, ontiny electronics,modern handhelds, and in thebrowser.

Our general cross-platform desktop emulator requiresSDL2, alternatively, you could download the plainWin32orX11 version, but we will not cover these in this guide. If you don't have SDL2, here's how to get it:

sudo pacman -S sdl2 # Arch
sudo apt install libsdl2-dev # Ubuntu
sudo xbps-install SDL2-devel # Void Linux
brew install sdl2 # OSX
doas pkg_add sdl2 # openBSD

### Startup

Double-click onuxnemuto launch it, on some Linux distribution, it might not be possible to do so, if for some reason uxnemu is not be clickable, navigate to the downloaded files in the terminal and launch it from there. To launch the ROM from the terminal, point the emulator to the target .rom file:

bin/uxnemu path/to/example.rom

There are many ways to launch ROMs:

* With the launcher program, see preview image above
* By dragging .rom files onto the emulator window
* Via the terminal

### Emulator Controls

F1
toggle zoom

F2
toggle debugger

F3
take screenshot

F4
load launcher.rom

#### Buttons

L-Ctrl
A

L-Alt
B

L-Shift
Select

Home
Start

#### Other Systems

Uxn can also run on classic consoles and on old electronics. Currently, there are ports(not all are complete) forGBA, Nintendo DS, Playdate, DOS, Play Station Vita, Raspberri Pi Pico, Teletype, ESP32, Amiga, iOS, STM32, IBM PC, and many more.

See thefull list of emulators.

### Need a hand?

The following resources are a good place to start:

* AwesomeUXN list
* Uxntal(XXIIVV)
* Uxntal reference(XXIIVV)
* Uxn tutorial(Compudanzas)

You can also find us in#uxn on irc.libera.chat.
