---
title: AI Has Flooded All the Weather Apps | WIRED
url: https://www.wired.com/story/ai-has-flooded-all-the-weather-apps/
site_name: newsfeed
content_file: newsfeed-ai-has-flooded-all-the-weather-apps-wired
fetched_at: '2026-04-01T01:32:16.022742'
original_url: https://www.wired.com/story/ai-has-flooded-all-the-weather-apps/
author: Boone Ashworth
date: '2026-03-31'
published_date: '2026-03-31T13:00:00.000Z'
description: Weather forecasting has gotten a big boost from machine learning. How that translates into what users see can vary.
tags:
- wired
- gear
- gear / gear news and events
- gear / products / apps
---

Save Story
Save this story
Save Story
Save this story

You may havenoticed a drop of AI in your weather app lately. As companies race to infuseartificial intelligence into every product, the wave has come for the humble weather app.

The Weather Company, operator of the Weather Channel, today released a revamped version of itsStorm Radarapp, featuring an AI-powered Weather Assistant that lets users customize how they view forecasts and weather maps, toggling between layers like radar, temperature, and weather conditions like wind and lightning.

It can also sync with other apps, like your calendar, to send text notifications and weather summaries that tie info about the upcoming weather into your daily plans. You can stick a voice on it to talk like an old-timey radio weatherman, if you’re into that. Like most weather apps, it gets the data comes from theNational Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration(NOAA) and the National Weather Service (NWS).

The app costs $4 per month. It is available on iOS only for now, but the company says an Android version is coming eventually.

“We wanted to build an experience that would be a weather level-up for anybody, really, from a casual observer to a seasoned storm chaser,” says Joe Koval, a senior meteorologist at the Weather Company. “If you're looking for advice on when the weather will be good to walk your dog tomorrow, you no longer have to look at a bunch of different disparate weather data elements and try to figure out the answer to that question yourself.”

You can find the weather on your phone already, of course. Android and iOS devices typically place the weather prominently beside the time. Google and Apple have both fused their weather apps into their smartphones directly. AI features have since been infused, offering insights and summaries about the day to come.

But there are third-party weather apps galore, like Storm Radar,Carrot Weather,Rain Viewer, andAcme Weather—an app from theformer Dark Sky appcreators. New weather apps likeRainbow Weatheraim to be AI-first. Weather services are also being integrated directly into AI chatbots, like Accuweather, which recentlylaunched an appdirectly in OpenAI’s ChatGPT.

“Everyone has their idea of what they want in a weather app, what data they're interested in, how they're interested in it being presented,” says Adam Grossman, a founder of the DarkSky app. “How do you build a single weather app that works for everybody?”

DarkSky, one of the most popular iOS weather apps, wasbought by Applein 2020 and merged into itsApple Weatherservice. Grossman eventually left Apple to start Acme Weather, with the goal of making a weather prediction service that better telegraphs the uncertainty of forecasting.

“No matter how good your forecast is, you're going to be wrong,” Grossman says. “That’s something that weather apps traditionally haven’t done a great job of doing. Our approach is trying to figure out how to add those pieces of context back in.”

Repositories of weather information usually come from government sources, like NOAA or other global weather services that collect data from weather satellites, radar, weather balloons, and on-the-ground instruments. All that data is fed into weather prediction models that simulate the physics of the atmosphere. Those predictions are often generated by resource-intensive supercomputers, but machine learning models have trimmed that processing down, making predictions quicker. (Though sometimes less accurate, which can be accounted for by comparing multiple models.)

Weather apps like Storm Radar and Acme Weather translate that bounty of information by corroborating and compiling the models, then helping to create high-resolution maps and a visual representation of the data, an area where AI can also be particularly useful.

“Machine learning is probably the biggest change to weather forecasting in a while,” Grossman says. “And they’re just getting started.”

The push of using AI in weather apps comes in the era where the government hasdismantled NOAAand other federal efforts to track andmeasureweather patterns, leaving parts of the job of data collection toprivate companies. Weather systems also have a harder time predicting extreme weather events andclimate disasters, which are growing ever more frequent.

Koval says Storm Radar is taking a science-first approach to AI in its app.

“If the NWS issues a warning, the AI isn't going to guess the risk,” Koval says. “It's going to cross-reference that official warning with your specific calendar at your location to tell you how it impacts your plan.”

Storm Radar is a more maximalist approach, with layered complexity akin to something like Google Maps. For the real weather sickos, widgets can be customized to cover the screen, displaying any and all weather information available. The AI features of the app aim to simplify that overload of data, letting the AI assistant give a summary or short description of the weather to come. That can come in text form, or via several differently accented voices that aim to sound like TV meteorologists.

“You can choose a persona ranging from a vintage weather person to a pop culture fan,” Koval says. “Personalization is really a key in this app.”

Grossman, who says Acme Weather uses AI on the forecasting side, is skeptical about any service—weather or otherwise—that touts its AI just for the sake of having AI.

“It should feel transparent; it shouldn't feel like you're talking to a chatbot," Grossman says. "If it's about surfacing the right content, you should open it up, and you should see what you need to see. It shouldn’t feel like AI is doing anything for you.”

## Comments

Back to top
Triangle

## You Might Also Like

* In your inbox:Upgrade your life withWIRED-tested gear
* Nvidia plans to launchan open-source AI agent platform
* Big Story:Hebuilt the Epstein database—it consumed his life
* Should you leave your phonecharging overnight?
* Watch:How right wing influencers infiltrated the government
Boone Ashworth
 is a staff writer on the WIRED Gear desk, where he writes about connected hardware, sustainability, and the right to repair. He graduated from San Francisco State University and still lives in the city. He is currently training to be a virtual reality DJ. ... 
Read More
Staff Writer
* X
Topics
artificial intelligence
Apps
machine learning
data
weather
NOAA
climate
Give Your Phone a Huge (and Free) Upgrade by Switching to Another Keyboard
Change up the default keyboard in Android and iOS and feel the benefit.
David Nield
Signal’s Creator Is Helping Encrypt Meta AI
Moxie Marlinspike says the technology powering his encrypted AI chatbot, Confer, will be integrated into Meta AI. The move could help protect the AI conversations of millions of people.
Matt Burgess
Which Google Pixel Phone Should You Buy?
Here’s a guide to all the models—plus Pixel case recommendations and smart software tricks to try.
Julian Chokkattu
Android Auto’s Secret Superpower Is a Customizable Shortcut Button
Put bespoke commands on the Android Auto home screen with this little-known feature.
David Nield
Palantir Demos Show How the Military Could Use AI Chatbots to Generate War Plans
Software demos and Pentagon records detail how chatbots like Anthropic’s Claude could help the Pentagon analyze intelligence and suggest next steps.
Caroline Haskins
Google Maps Gets Chatty With a New Gemini-Powered Interface
“Ask Maps,” rolling out today to Google Maps on mobile, lets you ask Gemini questions about locations and even to plan trips on your behalf.
Reece Rogers
I Used Google’s New Gemini-Powered ‘Help Me Create’ Tool in Docs. It’s Great at Corporate-Speak
Google has injected Docs, Drive, Sheets, and Slides with its Gemini assistant, adding new features that can pull information from your emails and the web to help you draft content. I gave it a whirl.
Reece Rogers
6G Is Coming. Here’s What to Expect From the Next Generation of Cellular Tech
When it succeeds 5G in 2030, the next-gen mobile network will focus on upload speeds, AI, and radar-like “sensing” of vehicles, devices, and people.
Julian Chokkattu
Summon This AI Agent by Speaking Its Wake Word Mid-Phone Call
Deutsche Telekom, the German cell provider—which holds a majority stake in T-Mobile—is partnering with ElevenLabs to enable an AI assistant on all of its network’s calls in Germany. No app required.
Boone Ashworth
There Aren’t a Lot of Reasons to Get Excited About a New Amazon Smartphone
The company is reportedly building a new AI-powered mobile device. If Amazon follows through on the plan, experts warn it would be next to impossible to break into a crowded market.
Julian Chokkattu
Pico’s Project Swan XR Headset Wants to Go Where the Apple Vision Pro Failed
The ByteDance company wants to make the case that XR is “not just for gaming” anymore by giving you a digital office.
Boone Ashworth
The Sunrise Alarms That Actually Woke Me Up
I’ve never been a morning person. This bedside gadget is the only thing that’s ever changed that.
 Nena Farrell 

## Wired Coupons

T-Mobile Promo Code

Samsung GS25+ Free With T-Mobile for Business SuperMobile

Squarespace Promo Code

Squarespace Promo Code: 20% Off Annual Acuity Subscriptions

LG Promo Code

LG Discount Code: 10% Off Any Purchase

Dell Coupon Code

10% Off Dell Coupon Code for New Customers

Samsung Promo Code

30% Samsung Coupon - Offer Program 2026

Canon Promo Code

10% Off Canon Promo Code + Up to 30% Off