---
title: 'Amazon’s Big Spring Sale 2026: all of the latest deals | The Verge'
url: https://www.theverge.com/gadgets/897580/amazon-big-spring-sale-2026-deals-news
site_name: newsfeed
content_file: newsfeed-amazons-big-spring-sale-2026-all-of-the-latest-dea
fetched_at: '2026-04-01T11:24:35.132824'
original_url: https://www.theverge.com/gadgets/897580/amazon-big-spring-sale-2026-deals-news
author: Cameron Faulkner
date: '2026-04-01'
published_date: '2026-03-20T13:00:00+00:00'
description: Amazon’s annual Big Spring Sale is here. Through April 1st, we’re rounding up the biggest news and discounts on a range of tech, from headphones to drones.
tags:
- the-verge
- deals
- gadgets
- verge shopping
---

* Gadgets
Updated 
Today, 
Apr 1, 2026, 1:14 AM UTC

# Amazon’s Big Spring Sale 2026: all of the latest deals

by
 
 
Cameron Faulkner
* Link
* Share
* RSS

If you’re looking for the best time to get a deal this spring, it might very well be duringAmazon’s Big Spring Sale, which runs through 11:59PM PT tonight. We’re still highlighting the best that the sale has to offer, including the many so-called “doorbuster” deals that will appear throughout the remainder of the seasonal shopping event.

Despite the fact that the sale will end in a few short hours, you can find deals on all sorts of consumer tech, from personal audio and home theater upgrades to steep discounts on video games, mobile accessories, and various doo-dads for tinkerers. Given that the sale coincides with the arrival of spring, you can also find deals on plenty of outdoor-friendly gear, including portable Bluetooth speakers, open-style earbuds, and more.

Amazon’s annual spring sale doesn’t require a Prime membership to participate in, either. Most of the deals are available to everyone, with big-name retailers like Best Buy, Walmart, and Target matching Amazon’s pricing in many instances. There are sure to be some Prime-exclusive sales in the mix, so regardless of where you plan to shop, we’ve got you covered.

* PinnedToday,1:14 AM UTCSheena VasaniandBrandon Widder## The best deals to shop during the last few hours of Amazon’s Big Spring SaleImage: Cath Virginia / The VergeAmazonlovesto manufacture an event. March is historically a dry spell for deals; however, withAmazon’s third annual Big Spring Sale, which runs through 11:59PM PT tonight, the retail behemoth is hoping to lure in would-be shoppers with the promise of steep(ish) savings and discounts on more seasonal, spring-centric items to hold folks over until Prime Day surfacesat the onset of summer.The bulk of the deals we’ve seen over the past week aren’t quite on par with Black Friday or Prime Day, and, as with most shopping events, not everything on sale is worth picking up. That said, Amazon’s latest sale still represents one of the first big opportunities we’ve seen this year to save — and bypass some tariff-induced pain —especially since some of our favorite gadgets are still matching their lowest prices to date, including robot vacuums, headphones, and charging accessories.Read Article >
* Mar 31Sheena VasaniandBrandon Widder## The AirPods Pro 3 are nearly matching their best-ever price for Amazon’s Big Spring SalePhoto: Amelia Holowaty Krales / The VergeEarlier this month, Apple announced theAirPods Max 2, a pair of over-ear headphones that leverage the company’s H2 chip for AI-powered live translation, conversation awareness, and a host of newer features. However, if you’re okay with a pair ofearbuds, theAirPods Pro 3offer access to all the same features for less — especially given they’re on sale atAmazonandWalmartfor $199 ($50 off) as part ofAmazon’s Big Spring Sale, matching their second-best price to date.For iPhone owners, nothing else really compares to the AirPods Pro 3. Apple’s latest pair of premium earbuds deliver the best active noise cancellation and richest sound of any AirPods model to date, combined with a more comfortable, angled design that fits securely and naturally in your ear canal. They also feature a new XXS ear tip size and a more robust IP57 rating for sweat and water resistance, making them better suited for long-distance runs and various gym activities.Read Article >
* Mar 31Brandon Widder## Amazon is offering up to 50 percent off chargers from Anker and others for its Big Spring SaleImage: Twelve SouthAmazon’s Big Spring Salemay not have been as “big” as Black Friday or even Prime Day, but depending on what you’re after, the discounts are more appealing than you might think. Take charging accessories, for instance. Anker, Twelve South, Baseus, and others have sharply lowered the prices of some of our favorite add-ons, includinghandsome 3-in-1 charging stands,25,000mAh battery packs, andinexpensive Qi2 pucks.Unsurprisingly, the vast majority of the discounts are set to expire at 11:59PM PT this evening when Amazon’s spring promo officially draws to a close. However, unlike some of the recent deals we sawon Apple devicesandSonos gear, many of the deals we’re seeing on charging devices are still up for grabs — well, at least for the time being.Read Article >
* Mar 31Sheena Vasani## You can grab a four-pack of Govee’s color-changing smart bulbs for just $27You can add multiple bulbs to a single room to create cooler, more colorful effects.Image: GoveeSpring cleaning isn’t just about clearing things out. It’s also a chance to refresh your living space, and a simple place to start is smart lighting — specifically,Govee’s Smart A19 LED Light Bulbs. The color-changing bulbs can instantly change the vibe of your home, and now through the end of today, March 31st, you can buy a four-pack fromAmazonandGoveefor $26.99 ($13 off) as part ofAmazon’s Big Spring Sale. That’s just $3 shy of the bundle’s lowest price to date and the cheapest we’ve seen the bulbs go for since Black Friday.At 800 lumens, each bulb is bright enough for everyday use and offers over 16 million colors, along with adjustable brightness and tones. Govee also currently offers more than 30 preset scenes designed to fit different moods and occasions within the app, so you can quickly shift from brighter, more energizing light while cleaning or working to softer, more relaxed lighting once you’re done. There’s a music sync feature that uses your phone’s microphone to match the lights to whatever you’re playing, too, which is a fun way to set the mood for a party or make cleaning feel a little less like a chore. If you want more control, Govee’s DIY mode even lets you tweak both the colors and brightness to your liking and save your own presets for future use.Read Article >
* Mar 31Sheena Vasani## Anker’s power bank with built-in cables is one of my favorite gadgets, and it’s cheaper than usualImage: AnkerAnker’s Laptop Power Bankis one of the more useful gadgets I’ve bought in recent years. I know, it’s just a portable battery, but it’s packed with power and thoughtful features that are tough to find in other models. And right now, you can buy it for $95.99 ($24 off) — the best price of the year so far — atAmazonduring itsBig Spring Sale, fromWalmart, and directly fromAnkerthrough the end of today.The 25,000mAh / 90Wh power bank features three USB-C ports and one USB-A port, and you can get up to 130W total output when using all four ports. If you’re only charging one USB-C device, this power bank can deliver up to 100W, which is enough to quickly charge thelatest 14-inch M5-powered MacBook Pro. Plug in two USB-C devices, and it can go all the way up to a combined 165W.Read Article >
* Mar 31Cameron Faulkner## Hisense’s 75-inch U6 mini-LED TV is cheaper than its 65-inch modelImage: HisenseIf you’re keen to get a new 4K TV that has built-in streaming services provided by Amazon’s Fire TV software, it’s tough to get more for your money than withHisense’s U6. The company’s 75-inch, feature-packed mini-LED TV is an even better value than usual thanks to the discount happening on the final day ofAmazon’s Big Spring Sale. Right now, you can get it for an all-time low of around $549.96 ($750 off) atAmazonandBest Buy, which is actually $30 less than thediscounted 65-inch model. You’re saving money while getting 10 more inches of screen real estate, not to mention more dimming zones.The U6 is full of appealing specs. Aside from its mini-LED backlighting, which lends to its bright picture and vivid contrast, Hisense’s midrange TV supports up to a 144Hz refresh rate at 4K resolution through two of its four HDMI ports. This makes it a great choice if you want to play PC or console games at fast framerates (although consoles that support HDMI 2.1 top out at 120Hz refresh rate). HDR content should look good, too, no matter the service, since the U6 supports HDR10, HDR10 Plus Adaptive, HLG, and Dolby Vision IQ.Read Article >
* Mar 31Cameron Faulkner## Sony’s WH-1000XM5 headphones are a whopping 39 percent offEvery color is discounted at Amazon for a limited time.Photo by Chris Welch / The VergeAmazon is hostinga fantastic lightning saleon every color of theSony WH-1000XM5 over-ear headphones, offering them for $243 (originally $399) for a limited time. This is one of the biggest price reductions we’ve ever seen. Outside of a February discount at Adorama that briefly sold them for $204.56, we haven’t seen them fall below $250 price. The discount comes during the final day ofAmazon’s Big Spring Sale, which ends at 2:59AM ET on April 1st.At this discounted price, the XM5 are over $200 cheaper than their successor, the$458 XM6.Read Article >
* Mar 31Cameron Faulkner## Belkin’s battery-equipped Switch 2 case is more than 35 percent offImage: BelkinBelkin makes some of the best zip-up cases for the Nintendo Switch 2. Full stop. The company’s aptly titledCharging Case, which includes a 10,000mAh battery to keep your console charged while it’s protected, is particularly novel, although tough to justify at its usual asking price of $69.99. How about for around $45 instead? Now we’re talking.Right now, you can grab the battery-equipped case fromBelkinwith free shipping for about $25 off when you use promo codeVERGE35at checkout, which drops the price to $45.49 for a limited time. If you want some deal context, Amazon recentlyknocked the price down to $59.49as part of its ongoingBig Spring Sale, which was its lowest price to date before Belkin’s discount arrived.Read Article >
* Mar 30Sheena Vasani## Here are our favorite spring cleaning deals from Amazon’s Big Spring SaleAmazon’s Big Spring Saleis underway, so naturally, a lot of the deals are geared toward the season, including plenty of gadgets to help with spring cleaning. We’ve already rounded upa selection of great robot vacuum deals, but they’re just one part of a much broader swath ofVerge-approved tools that can make tidying up a little easier.If you’ve been putting off small fixes around the house, now is as good a time as any to tackle them with an electric screwdriver likeHoto’s entry-level model. Meanwhile, if you’re looking to clean the dust that collects in your keyboard or along shelves,Fanttik’s electric air dustercan clear it out in seconds. Then there’sBissell’s Little Green Mini, which is great for cleaning up spills and pet stains on carpet.Read Article >
* Mar 30Cameron Faulkner## The first Apple Home Key-ready smart lock with UWB is cheaper during Amazon’s Big Spring SaleImage: Jennifer Pattison TuohyThere are so manygreat smart locksout there. But one of best models that iPhone owners should consider buying now isAqara’s U400, which offers hands-free unlocking when you get close enough. It has Apple’s U1 ultra-wideband chip integrated to authenticate you and unlock the door hands-free, so all that you have to do is open the door when you get home. This smart lock is discounted for the first time during theBig Spring Sale, costing $229.49 (originally $269.99) atAmazon.As our reviewer Jennifer Pattison Tuohy put it inher hands-on impressions with the U400, hands-free unlocking isn’t new — but this is the most reliable implementation she’s tried yet. Apple’s Home Key relies on a mix of Bluetooth and UWB to connect and authenticate, and you don’t need an extra app.Read Article >
* Mar 30Cameron Faulkner## Beats’ gym-friendly Powerbeats Fit are $30 off for Amazon’s Big Spring SaleEvery color of the Beats Powerbeats Fit are discounted.Image: AppleFor iPhone owners, the AirPods Pro 3 are a fantastic all-around set of wireless earbuds, even for working out. Their value is especially tough to beat at$199.99; however, even with five sizes of silicone tips, they aren’t the best fit for some people, or for some kinds of workouts. If earbuds tend to fall out of your ears, theBeats Powerbeats Fitare worth considering now that they’re on sale as part ofAmazon’s Big Spring Sale, which drops them to an all-time low of $169.99 ($30 off) atAmazon,Best Buy, andB&H Photo.The Powerbeats Fit, whichlaunched in September, offer similar functionality for iPhone users as AirPods (namely, easy connectivity and hands-free Siri support), but their built-in silicone fin and ear tips should ensure a snug fit that you won’t get with a traditional pair of Apple earbuds. Like several recent Beats models, the Powerbeats Fit work great with Android, too, and charge via USB-C.Read Article >
* Mar 30Sheena Vasani## Dyson’s ultra-thin PencilVac Fluffycones is tougher to resist at $150 offDyson’s PencilVac Fluffycones is the cheapest it’s ever been.Photo by Jennifer Pattison Tuohy / The VergeRobot vacuums are great for keeping floors clean on a regular basis, but they don’t catch everything. If you’re looking for a tool to handle the finer details your robovac might miss — room corners, edges, hard stairs, entryways, etc. —Dyson’s PencilVac Fluffyconesis one of the lightest, most versatile stick vacuums you can buy. You can get one duringAmazon’s Big Spring Salefor $449.99 ($150 off) atAmazon,Best Buy, andTarget, marking a new low.The PencilVac is about as thin asDyson’s Supersonic hair dryerand weighs under four pounds. Its slim design lets it reach spots that robot vacuums (and even some other stick vacuums) can miss. While it’s not designed to do large-scale vacuuming (or for vacuuming carpet), it can handle dust bunnies on stairs, small tufts of hair, and debris like cereal or dried oatmeal with ease.Read Article >
* Mar 29Brandon Widder## Amazon’s Big Spring Sale is a great time to get a fancy, AI-powered bird feederImage: NetvueBird feeders have come a long way since their inception in the early 1900s. These days, it’s not all that surprising to see feeders kitted out with cameras and solar roofs, two marquee features you’ll find on feeders from both BirdBuddy and Netvue. And while modern hoppers can command a pretty penny,Amazon’s Big Spring Salehas dropped theNetvue Birdfy Feederto $135.99 ($124 off) andBirdbuddy Proto $179.99 ($120 off), which are some of the best prices we’ve seen.At their core, both smart bird feeders are designed to help you keep an eye on your soon-to-be feathery friends, allowing for image stills, video, notifications, and AI-powered identification. Birdfy’s offering cuts corners on hardware to keep costs down, though. It features the widest viewing angle of any model at 155 degrees; however, the video quality maxes out at 1080p, whereas the Birdbuddy Pro allows you to capture crystal-clear 2K video (with slow-mo). The accompanying solar panel isn’t integrated directly into the snap-on roof like it is with the Pro, either, which means it doesn’t look quite as slick once set up.Read Article >
* Mar 28Cameron Faulkner## SteelSeries’ feature-packed Nova Pro Wireless headset is $80 offPhoto by Amelia Holowaty Krales / The VergeTheSteelSeries Arctis Nova Pro Wirelesscame out almost four years ago, yet it’s still one of the best gaming headsets you can buy. Turns out, it’s not easy for other companies to duplicate all that SteelSeries got right with this one — mixing multiple audio sources, active noise cancellation, a retractable mic, hot-swappable batteries, and more. Normally priced at $379.99, it’s down to $299.99 atAmazonduring the company’sBig Spring Salethat lasts through April 1st at 2:59AM ET. The deal is also happening atBest Buyand fromSteelSeriesdirectly.The Nova Pro Wireless is a unique product in that twoVergestaffers tested the headset when it launched. Sean Hollister and I each received units and co-published an in-depthreviewbecause there were a lot of features to cover, and there was a lot to say about this fantastic headset.Read Article >
* Mar 28Cameron Faulkner## Here’s what Verge readers are buying during Amazon’s Big Spring SaleImage: AmazonWe have a pretty good understanding of which dealsVergereaders will gravitate toward. After all, what products and services resonate with our audience — and the quality of the deal itself — are what help us determine what to cover on any given day. And yet, we never know for sure how people will shop during shopping events likeAmazon’s Big Spring Sale, which runs through 2:59AM ET on April 1st.Apparently, many readers felt compelled to make quality-of-life purchases this year, the kind designed to make life run a little more smoothly. Things like aportable tire inflator, alil’ switch-flipping bot, and anelectronic screwdriverwere among the most-clicked items (gathered through anonymous shopping data). If you’re the kind of person who enjoys knowing what deals others think are worth jumping on, we’ve rounded them up below.Read Article >
* Mar 27Sheena VasaniandBrandon Widder## Insta360’s last-gen Link 2C is fantastic 4K webcam now that it’s 20 percent offImage: Insta360If you spend a lot of time presenting or chatting over video, you know how big a difference a decent webcam can make. Thankfully, if you’re looking to level up your setup at home or at work, the last-genInsta360 Link 2Cis currently available for $119.99 ($30 off) atAmazon,Best Buy, andB&H Photo. That’s the lowest price we’ve seen so far this year and only $20 more than the webcam’s lowest price to date.The Link 2C is the cheapest Link you can buy right now, and as such, it lacks the motorized gimbal found on its pricier counterparts. However, although it can’t physically follow you as you move around the room, it still uses AI-powered auto framing to digitally zoom and adjust, helping keep you — and anyone else you’re with — centered in the frame. Its half-inch sensor and 26-millimeter equivalent f1.8 lens also support up to 4K at 30fps or 1080p at 60fps, which is a noticeable step up from the 720p or 1080p resolution found on most built-in laptop webcams.Read Article >
* Mar 27Sheena Vasani## Anker’s 160W Prime Charger can power three devices at once, and it’s $50 offImage: AnkerIf you’re constantly switching between working at home and on the go,Anker’s latest 160W Prime Chargercan lighten your load by replacing multiple chargers with a single device. It’s normally $149.99, but right now you can buy it at bothAmazonandAnker’s online storefront(with coupon codeWS24MNV8G7) for $99.99 thanks toAmazon’s ongoing Big Spring Sale, which drops it to its lowest price to date.Despite being roughly the size of anAirPods Pro 3case, Anker’s newer charging gizmo is surprisingly powerful. It features a trio of USB-C ports, each capable of supplying up to 140W on its own, with a combined output of 160W across all three. Each port provides enough power to charge a16-inch MacBook Proto 50 percent in about 25 minutes, while simultaneously topping off two smaller devices, such as your phone or a pair of earbuds. In its default AI mode, the charger can even identify connected devices and dynamically adjust power across all three ports, helping to ensure everything charges efficiently.Read Article >
* Mar 27Cameron Faulkner## Nuki’s one-touch retrofit smart lock got its first-ever discountPhoto by Jennifer Pattison Tuohy / The VergeTheNuki Smart Lockis the best retrofit smart lock currently available for people who want a minimalist, feature-packed upgrade to their preexisting deadlock. It’s currently selling for $149 atAmazon— its cheapest price ever — during theBig Spring Sale. Its fast unlocking speed, Matter-over-Thread support, and broad smart home compatibility impressed my colleague Jennifer Pattison Tuohy, enough for her to consider it the most advanced model she’s tested in herreview.The Nuki Smart Lock’s pricing history is a bit confusing. It originally launched for $159.99 when we reviewed it in July 2025. Months later, the company raised the cost to $199.99 while addressing some of our major criticisms, namely that a paid subscription ($5.90 per month) was no longer necessary to remotely unlock the Nuki over Wi-Fi, or to receive lock activity notifications. By purchasing one now, you’re getting the best-ever price with all of the features we wish were available at no cost from the beginning.Read Article >
* Mar 27Cameron Faulkner## We handpicked the 24 best Big Spring Sale deals under $50Despite the fact that spring isn’t often associated with big discounts, Amazon seems keen to turn every season into one filled with savings. Case in point? The retailer is currently hosting aspring sales event, which will run through 2:59AM ET on April 1st. Retailers like Best Buy, Walmart, and Newegg have also hopped aboard the wave of deals, matching many of the offers Amazon is making.Although we’vealready published a postthat collects every major deal, regardless of price, this one focuses solely on gadgets priced at $50 or less. As usual, many products meet the criteria, but price alone doesn’t mean they’ll make the cut. We’ve narrowed it down to many of our core categories, including smart speakers, power banks, subscriptions, smart home devices, fast-charging cables, and a few things you might not have realized could improve your life. If you don’t want to spend a ton during Amazon’s annual Big Spring Sale, here are a couple of dozen semi-affordable products that come with our stamp of approval.Read Article >
* Mar 26Sheena Vasani## Robot vacuums from Eufy and Roborock are over 50 percent for Amazon’s spring salePhoto by Jennifer Pattison Tuohy / The VergeA good robovac can save you a surprising amount of time. Luckily,Amazon’s Big Spring Saleis a great time to pick one up, as you can currently find deals on everything frombasic, budget-friendly robovacsto high-end modelsthat can moporpick up objects. Whether you’re looking for a completely hands-free experience or just a little help keeping your floors clean, there are plenty of great options on sale right now, some of which have even dropped to their best price to date.To make finding the right vacuum a little easier, we’ve rounded up the best deals from brands like Eufy and Roborock below, as well as excellent alternatives from Narwal, Dreame, and Ecovacs. And if you’re curious what else is on sale, our larger roundup for thebest deals from Amazon’s Big Spring Salehas you covered with discounts on earbuds, smart lighting, and plenty of otherVerge-approved tech.Read Article >
* Mar 26Cameron Faulkner## Anker’s wireless charging pad offers Qi2 speeds for $15The MagGo wireless charging pad is available in black (shown here) or white.Image: AnkerI’ve probably savedminutesof my life by using a wireless charging puck. Minutes! More valuable than that, I’ve saved myself from bending over numerous times to pick up my USB-C cable that somehow always ends up on the floor. Those with magnet-equipped phones (like the iPhone 12 or newer, or a Google Pixel 10 or 10 Pro phone) can reap similar benefits from a MagSafe-ready Qi2 charging puck.Anker’s MagGo 15W padis one such model, and it’s down to $14.99 ($15 off) atAmazonandWalmartthanks toAmazon’s Big Spring Sale.Is 15W fast enough to quickly recharge your phone? If you define “quickly” as under an hour, then no. If you need a bunch of juice in just a few minutes, plugging in is your best bet. But is 15W perfect for leaving your phone to recharge overnight? Yes, indeed.Read Article >
* Mar 26Sheena Vasani## Fitbit’s budget-friendly Inspire 3 is $30 off, matching its best pricePhoto: Victoria Song/The VergeAmazon’s Big Spring Salehas delivered discounts on wearables like the latestApple Watch SE3andFitbit’s Charge 6. But they’re not exactly cheap even though they’re on sale. If you want something under $100, theFitbit Inspire 3has returned to its all-time low price of $69.95 ($30 off) atAmazon,Best Buy, andTarget.The wearable nails the essentials, accurately tracking basic health and fitness metrics. It’s a fine choice if you only want to track steps, though it can go deeper, offering features such as irregular heart rate alerts, sleep insights, and tools for managing stress. The tracker itself is lightweight and comfortable enough to wear while you sleep (The Verge’s Victoria Songsometimes forgotshe was even wearing it). Details are easy to read on its bright OLED display, and the tracker can last up to ten days on a single charge. If you don’t want to wear it on your wrist, you can remove it from the band and use it with aclip attachment instead.Read Article >
* Mar 26Sheena Vasani## Govee’s color-changing smart lamps are on sale for up to 30 percent offGovee’s good-sounding speaker / smart lamp hybrid can brighten your space with millions of colors.Photo by Jennifer Pattison Tuohy / The VergeSpeaking from experience, better lighting can completely change how a space feels. Over the years, I’ve filled my apartment with Govee’s color-changing lights, and they’ve made it feel calmer and more cheerful. That’s why it’s worth noting that a couple of its table lamps are on sale as part ofAmazon’s Big Spring Sale, including theTable Lamp 2 Pro, which has returned to its all-time low of $134.99 ($45 off) atAmazon,Best Buy, andGovee’s storefront. The more basic, bedside-friendlyTable Lamp 2is also available fromAmazon,Best Buy, andGoveefor $55.99 ($24 off), nearly matching its lowest price to date.Both RGB-equipped smart lamps can fill your space with millions of colors, and you can adjust both their brightness and warmth. They also come loaded with a slew of preset “scenes,” including sunset hues and holiday-inspired lighting themes, or you can create your own color combinations and effects using Govee’s app. The cheaper Table Lamp 2 offers over 60 preset scenes, while the pricier Table Lamp 2 Pro boasts more than 100, along with 210 individually controllable LED beads for smoother color blending. Both lamps can also sync with your music and support Matter, so you can connect either to Alexa, Google Home, or any major smart home platform for voice control.Read Article >
* Mar 26Sheena Vasani## Apple’s latest, best gear is cheaper during Amazon’s Big Spring SalePhoto: Antonio G. Di Benedetto / The VergeIt feels like nearly everything is receiving some sort of discount as part ofAmazon’s Big Spring Sale— that is, except for most Apple devices. Don’t worry, though; you’re not completely out of luck if you’re on the hunt for discounted Apple gear. We found several noteworthy Apple deals while sifting through Amazon’s catalog and competing sales events. In fact,Apple’s first-gen AirTagsare down to their lowest price to date, as are the latestApple Watch SEand theM4 iPad Air.Below, we’ve rounded up the best Apple deals you can get, many of which are also available at retailers like Best Buy and Walmart for the same price. And if you’re looking for more bargains, be sure to check out our detailed roundup of thebest Amazon Big Spring Sale deals.Read Article >
* Mar 25Brandon Widder## The Sonos Ace are a hefty 25 percent off for Amazon’s Big Spring SalePhoto by Chris Welch / The VergeAmazon’s third annual Big Spring Salemight be a great opportunity to pick upa color ebook readeror anRGB-equipped table lamp, but the pickings are slimmer when it comes to noise-canceling headphones. Sure, the Sony WH-1000XM6are just over $60 off, though I’d argue theSonos Aceare a better deal, given they’re currently on sale atAmazon,Best Buy, andSonos’ online storefrontfor a cool $299 ($100).The Sonos Ace are a great product that came at the wrong time. The company’s app crisis pretty much overshadowed their debut in 2024, which is a shame considering they’re a gorgeous pair of over-ear headphones with powerful, detailed sound and a comfortable design that lets you easily swap the ear pads. Sound-wise, you can expect something on par with what you might get from a pair of Bose or Apple headphones, with a natural-sounding transparency mode that’s really only second to the original AirPods Max (no wordon the Max 2).Read Article >
* Mar 25Sheena Vasani## The portable Fanttik X9 Pro tire inflator is down to its best price in monthsFanttik’s X9 Pro is $20 off, which is its best price since July.Image: FanttikIf you’ve ever had to deal with a flat tire, you know how quickly it can derail your day. That’s why it’s worth considering a portable inflator like theFanttik X9 Pro.The small, rechargeable air pump that can quickly inflate tires on cars and bikes is down to $59.98 ($20 off) atAmazonanddirectly from Fantikkas a part ofAmazon’s Big Spring sale.This sale price is the best we’ve seen since July.Fanttik’s portable pump can inflate a compact car tire from 30 to 35 PSI in about a minute, and with a maximum pressure of 150 PSI, it works with everything from SUVs and bikes to sports balls. Using it is simple; pull out its air hose, attach it to your tire (or other inflatable doodad), then select from one of the four preset modes for cars, motorcycles, bikes, and balls — or switch to manual if you want more control. The built-in display shows your tire’s pressure in real time, your selected target level, and remaining battery life, so you can easily track progress on the most important metrics. It also automatically shuts off when it’s done, so there’s no need to keep checking it.Read Article >
More Stories

## Most Popular

Most Popular
1. Another Starlink satellite has inexplicably exploded
2. TCL is taking over Sony’s TV business
3. You can finally replace your embarrassing Gmail username
4. No Kings is taking back Americana
5. Claude Code leak exposes a Tamagotchi-style ‘pet’ and an always-on agent

## The Verge Daily

A free daily digest of the news that matters most.

Email (required)
Sign Up
By submitting your email, you agree to our
 
Terms
 and 
Privacy Notice
. 
This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google
 
Privacy Policy
 
and
 
Terms of Service
 
apply.
Advertiser Content From

This is the title for the native ad