---
title: The Prime Reasons to Avoid Amazon — The New Oil
url: https://blog.thenewoil.org/the-prime-reasons-to-avoid-amazon
site_name: hackernews
fetched_at: '2025-07-06T10:21:53.542155'
original_url: https://blog.thenewoil.org/the-prime-reasons-to-avoid-amazon
author: The New Oil
date: '2025-07-06'
published_date: '2025-07-05T15:23:14Z'
description: Amazon’s now-legendary “Prime Day” is July 8-11. Much like Black Friday or Cyber Monday, this means sales on lots of items on Amazon’s va...
---

## The Prime Reasons to Avoid Amazon

July 5, 2025

Amazon’s now-legendary “Prime Day” is July 8-11. Much like Black Friday or Cyber Monday, this means sales on lots of items on Amazon’s vast marketplace, and as such many people flock to the giant’s website to get sweet deals on everything from computers to small kitchen appliances and more. While many of us are feeling the financial crunch more than ever, I urge you, dear reader, to resist the allure. I don’t typically have strong opinions about where people chose to shop or how they decide to spend their heard-earned money, but in this post I hope to lay out a convincing case for why Amazon is full-stop evil, no caveats, and is undeserving of your money on a moral and ethical level no matter what your values are. Amazon needs to be stopped, and legislation will not do so. Only its loyal consumers – who keep the beast alive – can do that by taking their money elsewhere. No matter your political or personal beliefs, I'm certain Amazon violates them in one way or another, and you should vote with your dollar by buying from other places whenever possible. Here’s why.

Table of Contents

* Amazon is an Enemy of Civil Rights
* Amazon Is An Enemy of Small Businesses
* Amazon Is An Enemy of Human Rights and Workers
* Amazon Is An Enemy of Democracy
* This Problem Does Not Exist in a Vacuum
* Facing Reality and Taking Next Steps

## Amazon Is An Enemy of Civil Rights

Do you believe that black lives matter? Do you think police have too much funding, too little oversight, are a tool of an oppressive regime, and/or are a private police force for the rich to keep the poor and minorities in line? Well guess what:up until 2020Amazon proudly sold their facial recognition software (called “Rekognition”) to law enforcement agencies all cross the country. Like every other facial recognition software out there, this system was notoriouslybad at accurately identifying minorities, mainly people of color and women (if you have Netflix, there's a whole movie about this calledCoded Bias, which I highly recommend). Amazon only stopped for PR reasons at the start of the George Floyd protests, and even then they only issued a “one-year moratorium.” This has since beenextended indefinitely, but frankly that doesn’t matter. It’s still just PR. Why do I say that? Because for one, that ban only applies to the US. Amazon is still free to sell their faulty facial recognition services to other countries and industries. Second, Amazon still gives police across the nation unfettered access toRing doorbells, allowing police to have vast real-time surveillance networks paid for by private citizens who may not even know law enforcement has this sort of access. Amazon is actively helping police spy on and identify – poorly – everyone, evenpeaceful protesters.

## Amazon Is An Enemy of Small Businesses

“Well I think all lives matter,” you may say to yourself, “and I support our law enforcement officers.” That’s cool. If you’re more right-leaning, you probably believe in the free market and you’ll likely be furious to know thatAmazon actively crushes small businesses. To be clear, I'm not talking about the free market where they simply provide a better product/service and win over customers from the other guys. Amazon has been repeatedly proven to use data gathered from small merchants who use their marketplace to create competing products, avoiding the financial hit of the mistakes that those smaller businesses may have already made in marketing, pricing, or production. (I believe this is the exact sort of data that would be covered by nearly every standard non-disclosure agreement that nearly every company uses these days, by the way.) Not that it matters, because Amazon can also just use their massive empire toundercut the competition, selling products at a massive loss until the competitor is eventually driven out of business, then bouncing prices back up to profit-making levels once there’s no alternatives to compete with. The use of this data in the first place isn’t just free market sorting itself out, it’s straight up corporate espionage. Amazon leverages their highly-invasive platform (which is so ubiquitous that to NOT sell on Amazon is practically a death sentence, thus forcing sellers and small business owners to submit to their monopoly or face extinction, and thereby dismantling the classic disingenuous “just go somewhere else” argument) to harvest sensitive business data and then use their resources to take the hit until the smaller guys can’t anymore and fold. In any other scenario, this would be corporate spying and illegal monopolizing. Even if it wasn’t illegal, I’d have a hard time believing any free-market enthusiast actually has no problem with this.

## Amazon Is An Enemy of Human Rights and Workers

Maybe you’re an apolitical person (there’s reallyno such thingand that’s actually a very “privileged” stance to take, but I digress). In this situation, you can probably agree that we’re all human beings. We all deserve to be treated with respect, no matter what. Well, Amazon is unbelievably hostile to worker’s rights. For years, Amazon Prime delivery drivers have been reporting unrealistic expectations like being expected to deliverover 250 packages per shift, missing pay, intimidation, favoritism, andbuggy AItracking their “performance” (even off the clock). Many of them have reported having to pee in bottles to try to stay on schedule. One reported ahospital-worthy injurywhere he was advised to finish his deliveries (several hours’ worth) before seeking medical treatment. Some claim they’re instructed to “drive recklessly” to meet targets. Warehouse workers reporttimed bathroom breaks and not being allowed sit down for a few minutesoutside of breaks. I’m all about hard work ethic, but you’ve seriously never had a day where you just needed five minutes to gather yourself?

Amazon took it one step further with patentedwearablesin the workplace to spy on employees and make them work even harder. (For the record, there’s no evidence they plan to roll this out yet but the fact that they expressed an interest in controlling the rights to this technology is unsettling.) When workers expressed an interest in unionizing so they could force more humane working conditions (aren’t there already supposed to be labor laws in the first place?) Amazon used their powerfulsurveillance networkto spy on and infiltrate those groups and even attempted to putcameras over the ballot boxesduring a union vote to “ensure integrity.” Amazon doesn’t give a crap about their employees, it’s all about the bottom line and quite frankly I’m surprised they haven’t just moved overseas to sweat shops.

## Amazon Is An Enemy of Democracy

“Wow, we really need some regulation on Amazon!” you might be thinking. Yeah, that’d be cool, except that at this point Amazon is more powerful than the US government.Amazon spent a record $21 million in 2022 on lobbying. Itdecreasedslightly in 2023, down to just under $20 million, and my latest statistic is just under $10m in the first half of 2024. Total Big Tech lobbying was $69 million in 2022, enough money (according tothis article) to pay for 3500 soldiers for a year, 1.4 million electric bills, 46000 decent-spec laptop computers, 350 heart transplants, 233000 weeks worth of groceries, and 1750 police officers for one year (or 175 for ten years), among many other interesting things. For context, the US federal government spent $53 million onpublic educationin 2022. And Big Tech is continuing to “cozy up” to the current administration, Amazon especially after Musk and Trump had theirfalling out.

Have you ever wondered why the “settlement” amounts in corporate lawsuits are always so obnoxiously low? It’s because corporations hire GOOD lawyers. They can afford to hire lawyers who are field experts and can pay them to focus all their time and attention only on that one company and that one subject/department. Then they can pour even more resources into filing new paperwork, doing research, fighting the case, etc. Eventually the court costs start to pile up and the idea of dragging this out for years and spending millions of dollars becomes arduous, frustrating, and impractical. Look at a semi-recentHome Depot data breach settlement– 10 years later! This is compounded even more when you’re an elected official. “You’ve spent HOW MUCH taxpayer money on fighting over some silly case that doesn’t even concern me – the voter – in a way I can tangibly see and understand when that money could’ve gone to better roads, schools, healthcare, national defense, etc?” The fact is that these cases do matter and do concern everyone, but they’re very abstract and it’s hard to care when you’re buying new tires multiple times per year because you damaged the old ones on a pothole, or when your kid brings home a history book from 1989, or when you work 60 hours a week and still can't afford basic healthcare coverage. Many experts argue that this a major reason the Democrats lost the 2024 election: their focus was on Trump as an existential threat to democracy while Trump focused on tangible issues like immigration and the economy.

Amazon can’t be reigned in by regulation because they can outspend the government in time, fines, lobbying, and any other area that they need to. (Not like they’re going to see much regulation anyways when the government is actively dismantlingany oversight of corporations.) Elected officials are under pressure to answer for their tax money spent (in theory). Amazon only has to answer to shareholders and only one question: “how much more money did you make me this quarter?” They can afford to hire lobbyists who shape the laws –literally– and if they fail that they can always drag the court case into oblivion until it just gets settled. This is not how democracies are supposed to function, where people can pay to win. That’s an oligarchy.

## This Problem Does Not Exist in a Vacuum

Do you remember whenChris Brown beat Rihanna? When that was still top news and I met people who listened to his music I’d always ask them “don’t have you an issue with him beating up Rihanna?” and without fail they’d always answer “Of course! But I just like his music, I don't support what he did.” Here’s the thing though: it’s impossible in situations like that to benefit without supporting the person in question. Every album purchase, every stream, every shirt purchased, every YouTube view, these are all metrics his managers can use to justify his popularity and book large venues with large payments. Honestly I’d even leverage illegal downloads if I was his booking agent. “They can download a song but they can’t download a concert. Those are potentially paying fans.” The same is true with Amazon. In no way can you give any money to Amazon and NOT be directly contributing to these problems I’ve listed above. Every penny you spend can be directed towards developing new surveillance tech or hiring new sales people to score newgovernment contracts. Every purchase you make says that you’re okay with how things are currently working at Amazon and shows them that you’re willing to spend money there. Even using Alexa issharing your data, which Amazon then uses to refine their products or serve you more ads (which they get paid for). There is absolutely no way for you to use Amazon that doesn’t tell their shareholders “I’m okay with this. Keep the course.” Theonlyway that we can ever hope to affect change is to force their hand by taking your money elsewhere.

## Facing Reality and Taking Next Steps

Look, I’m a realist, okay? I know that sometimes there are things that youabsolutelycannot get anywhere else except Amazon (or if you can, it costssignificantlymore). First off, I’d ask you to weigh your definition of “significantly.” Paying $5 more on a $100 product – especially a luxury you can live without – is not “significant.” Furthermore, depending on your financial situation, paying $5 more on a $20 product may also not be much for you. In these cases, I urge you to take the ethical path and not give into Amazon. It’s worth paying a little extra for a good cause. Having said that, if youmustuse Amazon, here’s my suggestions: first off, if you already have an account, you’re probably fine to keep using it from a privacy perspective. Your history will stay there, but frankly if you create a new account, it’s likely to get flagged and suspended or if you do it wrong Amazon will still trace it back to you anyways. Feel free to keep your current account, but go ahead and make sure you use good practices likestrong passwords,two-factor authentication, andalias e-mail addresses.

If you’re making a new account, I recommend using analias email addressor an old, already very-publicly exposed email address for credibility purposes (like an old Gmail address). I’ve had good success with buying pre-paid Amazon gift cards in cash at 7-Eleven and using those to make my purchases, however I’ve heard some people have still had their accounts closed for suspected fraud in short order, so don’t put too much money in right away in case that happens. You can attempt to make new accounts for every purchase (since ideally this should be rare for you anyways), or you can attempt to make one account and just keep topping it up as needed.

Last but not least, I encourage you not only to avoid Amazon itself, but avoid theirsubsidiariesas using them will still contribute to Amazon’s unethical empire. Unfortunately this includes popular brands like Twitch, Audible, IMDB, GoodReads, Zappos, and over 100 others. I know there's a lot and it can be hard, but as I outlined before we can’t keep hoping someone else will reign them in. There are often many feasible alternatives. I use my public library's app for audiobooks. In my case, that's Libby, which still comes with privacy concerns, but I find it to be the “lesser evil” by a mile – I'm supporting the library and the author, Libby collects less data than Amazon, I'm saving money, and I'm not being lulled into a false sense of “ownership.” In the case of GoodReads, there are privacy-respecting alternatives likeBookwyrm. For IMDB, I simply useWikipedia(it's less cluttered anyways). It’s going to take a collective, serious effort to hit them where it hurts (the wallet) and force them to start being a more ethical company.

Prime Day is this week. Please, avoid it. Be the change you want to see in the world. A drop of water alone isn't much, but combined in force, a flood can change the world.

Tech changes fast, so be sure to checkTheNewOil.orgfor the latest recommendations on tools, services, settings, and more. You can find our other content across the webhereor support our work in a variety of wayshere. You can also leave a comment on this post here:Discuss...
