---
title: YOU JUST REVEIVED
url: https://dylan.gr/1772520728
site_name: hnrss
content_file: hnrss-you-just-reveived
fetched_at: '2026-03-05T11:16:17.063810'
original_url: https://dylan.gr/1772520728
date: '2026-03-05'
description: ex program, en farm
tags:
- hackernews
- hnrss
---

Disclaimer: These are my personal views and do not represent any organization or professional advice.

#miscTue, 03 Mar 2026 08:52:08 +0200# YOU JUST REVEIVEDThis post is dedicated to the nameless Vodafone employee watching over me and my family and blessing us with an abundance of free minutes.My family and I share a single mobile phone. To be more precise, we share two sim cards which move between a nearly 10 year old Samsung smartphone and a dumb flip phone depending on the present circumstances.The other day we received an SMS from Vodafone. Being a prepaid plan, the phone is showered with offers, promotions and gifts enticing the load of more credit. The longer the interval between top-ups the more messages the phone receives. I thought this message was one of those but I was wrong. This message was special.YOU JUST REVEIVED FREE UNLIMITED DATA AND 999999 MINUTES TO ALL FOR 5 DAYS! ENJOY BROWSING WITHOUT LIMITS WITH AN OFFER EXCLUSIVELY FOR YOU! -VodafoneUsually, the offers we receive from Vodafone are conditional and require money be spent for them to activate ("SUPER OFFER! 50GB for 30 DAYS WITH 12,70€"). Sure, after a top-up they throw some free things at you but this message was different. An unprompted and unconditional gift of a million minutes and according to Vodafone —typo and all— just for me!Before I continue, I will answer the obvious question: Did I actually receive 999999 minutes? Yes, indeed I did. But unfortunately, I was only given 7200 minutes to spend my 999999 minutes and I could only spend them 1 minute at a time.At first I thought this message was sent in error but that didn't make sense. If the messages were entirely automated the likelihood of the typo appearing should be zero. I've been receiving messages from Vodafone for years and this is the first time I have seen a typo.I thought the number was possibly an untransformed placeholder of some kind but I actually received the minutes. Surely if these things are automated there would be a safeguard in place to prevent such large values?Could this merely be the hallucinations of a LLM? I don't think so. I doubt the system sending these messages to me for nearly a decade has been replaced with a large language model. I don't know why but this seems unlikely.My mind then went the only place it possibly could: Is there a human being in a room somewhere far far away sending me ALL CAPS gifts and offers? Are the messages manually typed out? Did someone make a mistake and accidentally give me a million minutes?Was this offerreallyexclusive or are there others out there who also received it? How many accounts does each person manage at once? Do they keep the same accounts they are assigned or is my account moved between handlers?If itisan automated system, what circumstances could cause this message to occur? Why did I receive it and not someone else? Is the typo baked into some template somewhere?It's all so strange and I doubt I'll find answers but that's OK. For five days I had a million minutes and I was possibly the first and only Vodafone minute millionaire.—Dylan Araps