---
title: Big O
url: https://samwho.dev/big-o/
site_name: lobsters
fetched_at: '2025-08-23T23:07:54.455312'
original_url: https://samwho.dev/big-o/
date: '2025-08-23'
description: A visual introduction to big O notation.
tags: compsci
---

Big O notation is a way of describing the performance of a function without
using time. Rather than timing a function from start to finish, big O describes
how the time grows as the input size increases. It is used to help understand
how programs will perform across a range of inputs.

In this post I'm going to cover 4 frequently-used categories of big O notation:constant,logarithmic,linear, andquadratic. Don't worry if
these words mean nothing to you right now. I'm going to talk about them in
detail, as well as visualise them, throughout this post.

 Before you scroll! This post has been sponsored by the wonderful folks at
ittybit
, and their API for working
 with videos, images, and audio. If you need to store, encode, or get
 intelligence from the media files in your app, check them out!

## #Iterating

Consider this JavaScript function that calculates the sum of 1 to n.

function

sum
(
n
)

{


let

total

=

0
;


for

(
let

i

=

1
;

i

<=

n
;

i
++
)

{


total

+=

i
;


}


return

total
;

}

I'm going to pass in 1 billion, written using the shorthand1e9, so it takes a
noticeable amount of time to run. Press thebutton below to
measure how long it takes to calculate the sum of 1 to 1 billion.

function sum(n) {
 let total = 0;
 for (let i = 1; i <= n; i++) {
 total += i;
 }
 return total;
}
const result = sum(1e9);

On my laptop this takes just under 1 second. The time you get may be different,
and it may vary by a few tens of milliseconds each time you run it. This is
expected.

Timing code this way, by taking the start time and the end time and finding the
difference, is calledwall-clock time.

How long do you think 2 billion,2e9, will take?

function sum(n) {
 let total = 0;
 for (let i = 1; i <= n; i++) {
 total += i;
 }
 return total;
}
const result = sum(2e9);

It takes about twice as long. The code loopsntimes and does a single
addition each time. If we passed in 3 billion, we would expect the execution
time to increase by a factor of three.

 The relationship between a function's input and how long it takes to execute
 is called its
time complexity
, and
big O notation
 is how we
 communicate what the time complexity of a function is.

Play around with the buttons below. Each bar adds an extra 1 billion to thenthat we pass tosum, so the1e9button callssum(1e9),
the2e9button callssum(2e9), and so on. You should see2e9take about twice as long as1e9, and3e9take about three times as
long as1e9.

 function sum(n) {
 let total = 0;
 for (let i = 1; i <= n; i++) {
 total += i;
 }
 return total;
 }


sum(1e9);

sum(2e9);

sum(3e9);

sum(4e9);

sum(5e9);

Becausesum's wall-clock time grows at the same rate asn, e.g.sum(20)would take twice as long assum(10), we say thatsumis a "linear"
function. It has a big O of n, orO(n).

 Why do we use that syntax:
O(n)
? What is O? Why those brackets?

The "O" stands for "order," short for "order of growth." Said out loud it would
be: "the order of growth of thesumfunction is n."O(n)is a compact way
to write that. The notation was created by the German mathematician Paul
Bachmann in 1894. Also, the "O" (letter) might look like a 0 (number) in some
typefaces. It is always the letter O.

A different way to sum the numbers from 1 to n is to use the formula(n*(n+1))/2. Carl Friedrich Gauss discovered this formula in the early 1800s, and
it's a clever way for us to avoid having to loop over all of the numbers.

Here's the result of this formula with the numbers from 1 to 5. In each case
the result should be the same as doing, e.g.1+2+3+4+5forn=5.

* (1*2)/2 = 2/2 = 1
* (2*3)/2 = 6/2 = 3
* (3*4)/2 = 12/2 = 6
* (4*5)/2 = 20/2 = 10
* (5*6)/2 = 30/2 = 15

Here's howsumwould look if it used that formula instead of the loop we had
before:

function

sum
(
n
)

{


return

(
n

*

(
n

+

1
)
)

/

2
;

}

How do you think the wall-clock time of this function changes asnincreases?
The next two examplesdiffer by a factor of 100.

function sum(n) {
 return (n * (n + 1)) / 2;
}
const result = sum(1e9);

function sum(n) {
 return (n * (n + 1)) / 2;
}
const result = sum(100e9);

This example isn't broken. Both of these functions take almost no time to at
all. The variance in timing is caused by the browser, and the unpredictability
of computers, not thesumfunction. Running each example a few times, you
should see that the wall-clock time hovers around the same value for both.

We call functions like this, whose wall-clock time is about the same no matter
what input you give it,constantorO(1).

 Wow, so we improved our sum function from
O(n)
 to
O(1)
! It
 always runs instantly now!

We did! Though it is crucial to remember thatO(1)doesn'talwaysmean
"instant." It means thatthe time taken doesn't increase with the size
of the input.In the case of our newsumfunction, it's more or less
instant. But it's possible for anO(1)algorithm to take several minutes or
even hours, depending on what it does.

It's also possible for anO(n)algorithm to be faster than anO(1)algorithm for some of its inputs. Eventually, though, theO(1)algorithm
will outpace theO(n)algorithm as the input size grows. Play with the
slider below to see an example of that.

 The
O(1)
 line is always at 20 in that graph, so why don't we say

O(20)
 instead?

The purpose of big O notation is to describe the relationship between the input
and the wall-clock time of a function. It isn't concerned with what that
wall-clock time ends up being, only with how it grows.

Big O always describes growth in the smallest terms possible. It would quickly
get messy if the world had to figure out what number to put inside the brackets
for every function, and have those numbers be correct relative to each other.
Likewise, linear functions are alwaysO(n)and neverO(2n)orO(n +
1), becauseO(n)is the smallest linear term.

## #Sorting

Let's move away fromsumand talk about a different algorithm:bubble
sort.

The idea behind bubble sort is that you loop over the input array and swap
elements next to each other if they are not in the desired order. You do this
until you're able to complete a loop through the array without making any swaps.
It's called bubble sort because of the way numbers "bubble" up to their correct
position.

Below is a JavaScript implementation of this algorithm. We're going to sort
these numbers in ascending order, so the desired result is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

You can step through this code and watch the array get sorted using the
controls.steps forwards 1 line at a time,steps backwards,automatically
advances forward 1 line every second, andresets back to
the start.

i

+

1

 function bubbleSort(a) {
 while(true) {
 let swapped = false;
 for (let i = 0; i < a.length - 1; i++) {
 if (a[i] > a[i+1]) {
 [a[i], a[i+1]] = [a[i+1], a[i]];
 swapped = true;
 }
 }
 if (!swapped) break;
 }
 return a;
 }


 bubbleSort([3, 2, 5, 4, 1]);


Now you've had a look at the algorithm in action, what do you think its big O
is?

If the array is already sorted, the algorithm loops through once, does no swaps,
and exits. This would beO(n). But if the array is in any other order,
we need to loop through more than once. In the worst case, where the array is
in reverse order, we would have to loop throughntimes in order to move the
smallest element from the end to the start.

Looping through thenelements of our arrayntimes results inn*noperations, orn^2. That meansbubble sort is an O(n^2) algorithm.
Sometimes calledquadratic.

Because it's common for an algorithm's performance to depend not just on thesizeof the input, but also its arrangement,big O notation always describes
the worst-case scenario.

You may sometimes see the Greek letter "theta", Θ, instead of the letter O in
big O notation. This is used when the best and worst case have the same order
of growth. We can't use it for bubble sort because the best case is
O(n)

and the worst case is
O(n^2)
.

Below is another way to visualise bubble sort. It starts off with the array 5,
4, 3, 2, 1 from top to bottom. The end state should be 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 top to
bottom. Eachstep forward represents a full loop through
the array, potentially involving multiple swaps. UseBest,Worst, andRandto see different initial configurations.

If you played around withRanda few times you'll have noticed that you
do sometimes get only a couple of iterations. Despite this, bubble sort is stillO(n^2)because in the worst case you'll have to iterate over the arrayntimes.

## #Searching

The last algorithm I want to talk about isbinary search.

Let's start with a game.Think of a number between 1 and 100.I'm going
to try and guess what it is. Use the buttons below to tell me if your number is
higher or lower than my guess.

What I'm doing is starting in the middle of the range, 50, and eliminating half
of the possibilities with each guess. This is abinary search.

Using this method it will never take more than 7 guesses to find your number.
This is because we start with 100 possibilities and half of the possibilities
are ruled out with each guess.

The table below shows the guessing pattern for all numbers between 1 and 100,
use the slider to choose a number.

When it's possible to eliminate a fraction of possibilities with every step
of an algorithm, we call itlogarithmic. That means that binary search is
anO(log n)algorithm.

Below is a graph of the number of guesses I would need in order to figure out
your number for all of the numbers between 1 and 1000.

Every time your number doubles, I need 1 extra guess to find it. If you were to
pick a number between 1 and 1 billion, I would need 31 guesses at most to find
it. Logarithmic growth is really slow! Below is a graph comparing it toO(n)andO(n^2), which both grow much faster.

## #Putting this knowledge to work

In the previous sections of this post I've described the difference betweenO(1),O(log n),O(n), andO(n^2)algorithms. Let's have a look
at some situations you might encounter while writing code and what you can do to
improve your time complexity.

### #Finding an item in a list

Here's a function that checks if a list contains a specific item.

function

contains
(
items
,

target
)

{


for

(
const

item

of

items
)

{


if

(
item

===

target
)

{


return

true
;


}


}


return

false
;

}

If you're looking up items in the same list lots of times, you might want to
consider using a data structure that allows for faster lookups, such as aSet. Modern browsers implementSetin a way that givesO(1)time complexity for lookups.

However, don't do this:

function

contains
(
items
,

target
)

{


const

itemSet

=

new

Set
(
items
)
;


return

itemSet
.
has
(
target
)
;

}

Buildingthenew Set(items)is anO(n)operation! This is because theSetconstructor loops over all items in the array to add them to the set. You
need to weigh the cost of this upfront work against the potential savings from
faster lookups.

const

items

=

new

Set
(
[
"
apple
"
,

"
banana
"
,

"
cherry
"
]
)
;

items
.
has
(
"
banana
"
)

//
 true, and O(1)!

### #Loop an array with indexes

The code below contains a common mistake I've seen dozens of times in production
code. Have a read and see if you can answer:

* What is the big O of this function?
* How could we improve it?

function

buildList
(
items
)

{


const

output

=

[
]
;


for

(
const

item

of

items
)

{


const

index

=

items
.
indexOf
(
item
)
;


output
.
push
(
`
Item
${
index

+

1
}
:
${
item
}
`
)
;


}


return

output
.
join
(
"
\n
"
)
;

}

The problem is calling.indexOfinside the loop. The.indexOffunction is anO(n)operation! It works by looping over the array until it finds the target
element, returningnullif it doesn't. Calling it inside the loop makes the
overall big O of ourbuildListfunctionO(n^2)!

To fix this we can loop using an index. Looking up an element in an array by its
index isO(1), so the overall big O of the function is reduced toO(n).

function

buildList
(
items
)

{


const

output

=

[
]
;


for

(
let

i

=

0
;

i

<

items
.
length
;

i
++
)

{


output
.
push
(
`
Item
${
i

+

1
}
:
${
items
[
i
]
}
`
)
;


}


return

output
.
join
(
"
\n
"
)
;

}

You can also achieve the same result with JavaScript's.forEach((item, index) => {})method on arrays, orObject.entries().

### #Caching intermediate results

Consider this function to calculate the factorial of a number. A factorial in
mathematics is written as, e.g.,5!to represent5*4*3*2*1or3!to
represent3*2*1.

function

factorial
(
n
)

{


if

(
n

===

0
)

{


return

1
;


}


return

n

*

factorial
(
n

-

1
)
;

}

This function has a time complexity ofO(n), but most calls to this function
are going to redo work we've done before. Callingfactorial(4)and thenfactorial(5)will meanfactorial(4)is calculated twice.

We can cache the result of each calculation to avoid this redundant work.

const

cache

=

new

Map
(
)
;

function

factorial
(
n
)

{


if

(
cache
.
has
(
n
)
)

{


return

cache
.
get
(
n
)
;


}


if

(
n

===

0
)

{


return

1
;


}


const

result

=

n

*

factorial
(
n

-

1
)
;


cache
.
set
(
n
,

result
)
;


return

result
;

}

This makes use of theO(1)time complexity for lookups in aMap. It
doesn't change the worst case time complexity of thefactorialfunction, but
it does make the average case faster at the cost of increased memory usage.

 When it comes to performance, remember that you can't ever take what you read
 online at face value.
Always test your code
 before and after changes
 to make sure you're actually improving it!

## #Conclusion

Let's recap what we've learned:

* Big O notation describes therelationship between a function's input and
its wall-clock time.
* From slowest growth to fastest growth we saw examples of:O(1), constant time (best!)O(log n), logarithmic timeO(n), linear timeO(n^2), quadratic time
* O(1), constant time (best!)
* O(log n), logarithmic time
* O(n), linear time
* O(n^2), quadratic time
* We can improve the time complexity of the code we write by making better
algorithmic choices and avoiding common pitfalls.

These posts take me a long time to write, and they wouldn't be possible without
the support of my family, friends, sponsors, and reviewers. I'm so grateful to
all of you—you know who you are—for making it possible for me to make these.

If you enjoyed this post, I've written a bunch more similar that you can findon my homepage. I also love hearing from folks that have questions
or feedback, you can reach me viaemail,
onBluesky, or anonymously via
mysilly little ping service.

I'll leave you with one last graph comparing all of the time complexities we
covered in this post.
