---
title: A fast starburst wind consumes most of the energy from supernovae | Nature
url: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-026-10231-1
site_name: newsfeed
content_file: newsfeed-a-fast-starburst-wind-consumes-most-of-the-energy
fetched_at: '2026-03-25T19:22:02.007531'
original_url: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-026-10231-1
date: '2026-03-25'
description: Starburst galaxies often host multiphase, galaxy-scale winds thought to enrich the circumgalactic medium and limit further star formation by disrupting interstellar gas clouds1–3. These winds are primarily powered by supernovae4–6, but it remains unclear how supernova energy forms an organized flow. Here we use the Resolve spectrometer on the X-ray Imaging and Spectroscopy Mission to show that the hot (T&nbsp;=&nbsp;2&nbsp;×&nbsp;107 K) gas in the nucleus of the starburst galaxy M82 is moving quickly, with a line-of-sight velocity dispersion $$\sigma =59{5}_{-128}^{+464}\,\mathrm{km}\,{{\rm{s}}}^{-1}$$ . This is consistent with a hot, nuclear wind generated by thermal pressure. We show that a free-wind model reproduces the measured temperature but underpredicts the velocity. The inferred mass and energy outflow rates from the nucleus, about 7 M⊙ yr−1 and 4&nbsp;×&nbsp;1042 erg s−1, require that most supernova energy is thermalized. These outflow rates provide enough energy to
  power the ≳30 M⊙ yr−1 cool outflow and still transport up to 3 M⊙ yr−1 to the intergalactic medium, suggesting that thermal gas pressure is sufficient to power the multiphase wind without additional support from cosmic rays7. We also show that the nuclear gas is hotter and faster than the plasma seen on larger scales ( $$kT\,=\,{0.72}_{-0.08}^{+0.10}\,\mathrm{keV}$$ , $$\sigma =17{5}_{-73}^{+86}\,\mathrm{km}\,{{\rm{s}}}^{-1}$$ ), suggesting a distinct origin for the latter. Starburst galaxies are seen to host galaxy-scale winds, which are super-fast and could be powered entirely by the thermal pressure of gas heated by&nbsp;supernovae.
tags:
- nature
---

### Subjects

* Galaxies and clusters
* High-energy astrophysics

## Abstract

Starburst galaxies often host multiphase, galaxy-scale winds thought to enrich the circumgalactic medium and limit further star formation by disrupting interstellar gas clouds1,2,3. These winds are primarily powered by supernovae4,5,6, but it remains unclear how supernova energy forms an organized flow. Here we use the Resolve spectrometer on the X-ray Imaging and Spectroscopy Mission to show that the hot (T= 2 × 107K) gas in the nucleus of the starburst galaxy M82 is moving quickly, with a line-of-sight velocity dispersion\(\sigma =59{5}_{-128}^{+464}\,\mathrm{km}\,{{\rm{s}}}^{-1}\). This is consistent with a hot, nuclear wind generated by thermal pressure. We show that a free-wind model reproduces the measured temperature but underpredicts the velocity. The inferred mass and energy outflow rates from the nucleus, about 7M⊙yr−1and 4 × 1042erg s−1, require that most supernova energy is thermalized. These outflow rates provide enough energy to power the≳30M⊙yr−1cool outflow and still transport up to 3M⊙yr−1to the intergalactic medium, suggesting that thermal gas pressure is sufficient to power the multiphase wind without additional support from cosmic rays7. We also show that the nuclear gas is hotter and faster than the plasma seen on larger scales (\(kT\,=\,{0.72}_{-0.08}^{+0.10}\,\mathrm{keV}\),\(\sigma =17{5}_{-73}^{+86}\,\mathrm{km}\,{{\rm{s}}}^{-1}\)), suggesting a distinct origin for the latter.

Access through your institution

Buy or subscribe

This is a preview of subscription content,access via your institution

## Access options

Access through your institution

Access Nature and 54 other Nature Portfolio journals

Get Nature+, our best-value online-access subscription

$32.99/ 30 days

cancel any time

Learn more

Subscribe to this journal

Receive 51 print issues and online access

$199.00 per year

only $3.90 per issue

Learn more

Buy this article

* Purchase on SpringerLink
* Instant access to the full article PDF.

USD 39.95

Prices may be subject to local taxes which are calculated during checkout

Fig. 1: Resolve spectrum of the starburst nucleus of M82.
Fig. 2: Power budget and thermalization efficiency of the hot wind.
Fig. 3: A one-dimensional, free-wind model of M82.
Fig. 4: The multiphase power budget of the wind.

## Data availability

The XRISM data analysed in this study (ObsID 300068010) are available in the High Energy Astrophysics Science Archive Research Center (HEASARC;https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/archive.html) of NASA.Source dataare provided with this paper.

## Code availability

The codes used for the data reduction (https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/software/heasoft) and spectral fitting (https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/xanadu/xspec) are freely available from the HEASARC website.

## References

1. Scannapieco, E., Thacker, R. J. & Davis, M. High-redshift galaxy outflows and the formation of dwarf galaxies.Astrophys. J.557, 605–615 (2001).ArticleADSGoogle Scholar
2. Somerville, R. S. & Davé, R. Physical models of galaxy formation in a cosmological framework.Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys.53, 51–113 (2015).ArticleADSCASGoogle Scholar
3. Faucher-Giguère, C.-A. & Oh, S. P. Key physical processes in the circumgalactic medium.Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys.61, 131–195 (2023).ArticleADSGoogle Scholar
4. McKee, C. F., Cowie, L. L. & Ostriker, J. P. The acceleration of high-velocity clouds in supernova remnants.Astrophys. J.219, L23–L28 (1978).ArticleADSCASGoogle Scholar
5. Lehnert, M. D. & Heckman, T. M. Ionized gas in the halos of edge-on starburst galaxies: evidence for supernova-driven superwinds.Astrophys. J.462, 651 (1996).ArticleADSCASGoogle Scholar
6. Heckman, T. M., Armus, L. & Miley, G. K. On the nature and implications of starburst-driven galactic superwinds.Astrophys. J. Suppl. Ser.74, 833–868 (1990).ArticleADSCASGoogle Scholar
7. Thompson, T. A. & Heckman, T. M. Theory and observation of winds from star-forming galaxies.Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys.62, 529–591 (2024).ArticleADSCASGoogle Scholar
8. Freedman, W. L. et al. TheHubble Space TelescopeExtragalactic Distance Scale Key Project. I. The discovery of Cepheids and a new distance to M81.Astrophys. J.427, 628–655 (1994).ArticleADSGoogle Scholar
9. Strickland, D. K. & Heckman, T. M. Supernova feedback efficiency and mass loading in the starburst and galactic superwind exemplar M82.Astrophys. J.697, 2030–2056 (2009).ArticleADSCASGoogle Scholar
10. Walter, F., Weiss, A. & Scoville, N. Molecular gas in M82: resolving the outflow and streamers.Astrophys. J.580, L21–L25 (2002).ArticleADSCASGoogle Scholar
11. Veilleux, S., Rupke, D. S. N. & Swaters, R. Warm molecular hydrogen in the galactic wind of M82.Astrophys. J.700, L149–L153 (2009).ArticleADSCASGoogle Scholar
12. Leroy, A. K. et al. The multi-phase cold fountain in M82 revealed by a wide, sensitive map of the molecular interstellar medium.Astrophys. J.814, 83 (2015).ArticleADSGoogle Scholar
13. Martini, P. et al. Hikinematics along the minor axis of M82.Astrophys. J.856, 61 (2018).ArticleADSGoogle Scholar
14. McCarthy, P. J., van Breugel, W. & Heckman, T. Evidence for large-scale winds from starburst galaxies. I. The nature of the ionized gas in M82 and NGC 253.Astron. J.93, 264–275 (1987).ArticleADSCASGoogle Scholar
15. Shopbell, P. L. & Bland-Hawthorn, J. The asymmetric wind in M82.Astrophys. J.493, 129–153 (1998).ArticleADSCASGoogle Scholar
16. Förster Schreiber, N. M., Genzel, R., Lutz, D. & Sternberg, A. The nature of starburst activity in M82.Astrophys. J.599, 193–217 (2003).ArticleADSGoogle Scholar
17. Strickland, D. K. & Heckman, T. M. Iron line and diffuse hard X-ray emission from the starburst galaxy M82.Astrophys. J.658, 258–281 (2007).ArticleADSCASGoogle Scholar
18. Iwasawa, K. X-ray supernova remnants in the starburst region of M 82.Astron. Astrophys.652, A18 (2021).ArticleADSCASGoogle Scholar
19. Tashiro, M. et al. Status of X-ray imaging and spectroscopy mission (XRISM). InProc. SPIE,Space Telescopes and Instrumentation 2020: Ultraviolet to Gamma Ray(eds den Herder et al.), Vol. 11444, 1144422 (SPIE, 2020).
20. Smith, L. J. et al. HST/STIS optical spectroscopy of five super star clusters in the starburst galaxy M82.Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.370, 513–527 (2006).ArticleADSCASGoogle Scholar
21. Westmoquette, M. S. et al.Hubble Space Telescopespace telescope imaging spectrograph spectroscopy of the environment in the starburst core of M82.Astrophys. J.671, 358–373 (2007).ArticleADSCASGoogle Scholar
22. Nakai, N. et al. A nuclear molecular ring and gas outflow in the galaxy M 82.Publ. Astron. Soc. Jpn39, 685–708 (1987).ArticleADSCASGoogle Scholar
23. Chisholm, J. & Matsushita, S. The molecular baryon cycle of M82.Astrophys. J.830, 72 (2016).ArticleADSGoogle Scholar
24. Krieger, N. et al. NOEMA high-fidelity imaging of the molecular gas in and around M82.Astrophys. J. Lett.915, L3 (2021).ArticleADSCASGoogle Scholar
25. Vulic, N. et al. Black holes and neutron stars in Nearby galaxies: insights fromNuSTAR.Astrophys. J.864, 150 (2018).ArticleADSGoogle Scholar
26. Chevalier, R. A. & Clegg, A. W. Wind from a starburst galaxy nucleus.Nature317, 44–45 (1985).ArticleADSGoogle Scholar
27. Blandford, R. & Eichler, D. Particle acceleration at astrophysical shocks: a theory of cosmic ray origin.Phys. Rep.154, 1–75 (1987).ArticleADSCASGoogle Scholar
28. Seaquist, E. R. & Odegard, N. A nonthermal radio halo surrounding M82.Astrophys. J.369, 320 (1991).ArticleADSGoogle Scholar
29. Thompson, T. A., Quataert, E., Zhang, D. & Weinberg, D. H. An origin for multiphase gas in galactic winds and haloes.Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.455, 1830–1844 (2016).ArticleADSCASGoogle Scholar
30. Fukushima, K., Kobayashi, S. B. & Matsushita, K. Revisiting the abundance pattern and charge-exchange emission in the centre of M 82.Astron. Astrophys.686, A96 (2024).ArticleADSCASGoogle Scholar
31. Liu, J., Gou, L., Yuan, W. & Mao, S. Fe K lines in the nuclear region of M82.Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.437, L76–L80 (2013).ArticleADSGoogle Scholar
32. Contursi, A. et al. Spectroscopic FIR mapping of the disk and galactic wind of M 82 with Herschel-PACS.Astron. Astrophys.549, A118 (2013).ArticleGoogle Scholar
33. Lopez, L. A., Mathur, S., Nguyen, D. D., Thompson, T. A. & Olivier, G. M. Temperature and metallicity gradients in the hot gas outflows of M82.Astrophys. J.904, 152 (2020).ArticleADSCASGoogle Scholar
34. Ishisaki, Y. et al. In-flight performance of pulse-processing system of the ASTRO-H/Hitomi soft X-ray spectrometer.J. Astron. Telesc. Instrum. Syst.4, 011217 (2018).ArticleADSGoogle Scholar
35. Ranalli, P., Comastri, A., Origlia, L. & Maiolino, R. A deep X-ray observation of M82 with XMM-Newton.Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.386, 1464–1480 (2008).ArticleADSCASGoogle Scholar
36. Liu, J., Mao, S. & Wang, Q. D. Charge-exchange X-ray emission of M82: Kαtriplets of OVII, NeIXand MgXI.Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.415, L64–L68 (2011).ArticleADSGoogle Scholar
37. Zhang, S. et al. Spectral modeling of the charge-exchange X-ray emission from M82.Astrophys. J.794, 61 (2014).ArticleADSGoogle Scholar
38. Iwasawa, K., Norman, C., Gilli, R., Gandhi, P. & Peréz-Torres, M. A. Origin of the diffuse 4–8 keV emission in M 82.Astron. Astrophys.674, A77 (2023).ArticleADSCASGoogle Scholar
39. Foster, A. R., Ji, L., Smith, R. K. & Brickhouse, N. S. Updated atomic data and calculations for X-ray spectroscopy.Astrophys. J.756, 128 (2012).ArticleADSGoogle Scholar
40. Asplund, M., Grevesse, N., Sauval, A. J. & Scott, P. The chemical composition of the Sun.Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys.47, 481–522 (2009).ArticleADSCASGoogle Scholar
41. Brightman, M. et al. Spectral evolution of the ultraluminous X-ray sources M82 X-1 and X-2.Astrophys. J.889, 71 (2020).ArticleADSGoogle Scholar
42. Griffiths, R. E. et al. Hot plasma and black hole binaries in starburst galaxy M82.Science290, 1325–1328 (2000).ArticleADSCASPubMedGoogle Scholar
43. Fenech, D., Beswick, R., Muxlow, T. W. B., Pedlar, A. & Argo, M. K. Wide-field global VLBI and MERLIN combined monitoring of supernova remnants in M82.Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.408, 607–621 (2010).ArticleADSCASGoogle Scholar
44. Mayya, Y. D., Carrasco, L. & Luna, A. The discovery of spiral arms in the starburst galaxy M82.Astrophys. J.628, L33–L36 (2005).ArticleADSGoogle Scholar
45. Kroupa, P. On the variation of the initial mass function.Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.322, 231–246 (2001).ArticleADSGoogle Scholar
46. Kronberg, P. P., Biermann, P. & Schwab, F. R. The nucleus of M 82 at radio and X-ray bands: discovery of a new radio population of supernova candidates.Astrophys. J.291, 693–707 (1985).ArticleADSCASGoogle Scholar
47. Muxlow, T. W. B. et al. The structure of young supernova remnants in M82.Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.266, 455–467 (1994).ArticleADSGoogle Scholar
48. Huang, Z. P., Thuan, T. X., Chevalier, R. A., Condon, J. J. & Yin, Q. F. Compact radio sources in the starburst galaxy M82 and the ∑-Drelation for supernova remnants.Astrophys. J.424, 114–125 (1994).ArticleADSGoogle Scholar
49. Fenech, D. M., Muxlow, T. W. B., Beswick, R. J., Pedlar, A. & Argo, M. K. Deep MERLIN 5GHz radio imaging of supernova remnants in the M82 starburst.Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.391, 1384–1402 (2008).ArticleADSGoogle Scholar
50. Xu, X., Heckman, T., Yoshida, M., Henry, A. & Ohyama, Y. What are the radial distributions of density, outflow rates, and cloud structures in the M82 wind?Astrophys. J.956, 142 (2023).ArticleADSGoogle Scholar

Download references

## Acknowledgements

This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI grant nos. JP22H00158, JP22H01268, JP22K03624, JP23H04899, JP21K13963, JP24K00638, JP24K17105, JP21K13958, JP21H01095, JP23K20850, JP24H00253, JP21K03615, JP24K00677, JP20K14491, JP23H00151, JP19K21884, JP20H01947, JP20KK0071, JP23K20239, JP24K00672, JP24K17104, JP24K17093, JP20K04009, JP21H04493, JP20H01946, JP23K13154, JP19K14762, JP20H05857 and JP23K03459 and NASA grant nos. 80NSSC23K0646, 80NSSC20K0733, 80NSSC18K0978, 80NSSC20K0883, 80NSSC20K0737, 80NSSC24K0678, 80NSSC18K1684 and 80NNSC22K1922. L. Corrales acknowledges support from NSF award no. 2205918. C. Done acknowledges support from STFC through grant no. ST/T000244/1. L. Gallo acknowledges financial support from the Canadian Space Agency grant no. 18XARMSTMA. M. Sawada acknowledges support from the RIKEN Pioneering Project Evolution of Matter in the Universe (r-EMU) and the Rikkyo University Special Fund for Research (Rikkyo SFR). A. Tanimoto and the present research are supported, in part, by the Kagoshima University postdoctoral research program (KU-DREAM). S. Yamada acknowledges support by the RIKEN SPDR Program. I. Zhuravleva acknowledges partial support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation through the Sloan Research Fellowship. This material is based on the work supported by NASA under award no. 80GSFC24M0006. Part of this work was performed under the auspices of the US Department of Energy by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under contract no. DE-AC52-07NA27344. This work was supported by the JSPS Core-to-Core Program, JPJSCCA20220002. The material is based on the work supported by the Strategic Research Center of Saitama University. This research has made use of data obtained from the Chandra Data Archive provided by the Chandra X-ray Center (CXC). This research has made use of data from the NuSTAR mission, a project led by the California Institute of Technology, managed by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and funded by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. This research has made use of data from the NASA/ESA Hubble Space Telescope obtained from the Space Telescope Science Institute, which is operated by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, under NASA contract no. NAS 5-26555.

## Author information

### Authors and Affiliations

1. Department of Astronomy, University of Geneva, Versoix, SwitzerlandMarc Audard, Dominique Eckert & Stephane Paltani
2. Department of Physics, Ehime University, Matsuyama, JapanHisamitsu Awaki, Megumi Shidatsu & Yuichi Terashima
3. Department of Astronomy, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USARalf Ballhausen, Michael Loewenstein, François Mernier, Richard Mushotzky, Anna Ogorzalek & Erin Boettcher
4. NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD, USARalf Ballhausen, Rozenn Boissay-Malaquin, Renata Cumbee, Javier A. García, Kenji Hamaguchi, Takayuki Hayashi, Edmund Hodges-Kluck, Ann Hornschemeier, Timothy Kallman, Richard Kelley, Caroline Kilbourne, Maurice Leutenegger, Michael Loewenstein, Maxim Markevitch, François Mernier, Koji Mukai, Anna Ogorzalek, Takashi Okajima, Robert Petre, Frederick S. Porter, Katja Pottschmidt, Keisuke Tamura, Ayşegül Tümer, Brian J. Williams, Tahir Yaqoob, Mihoko Yukita, Erin Boettcher & Gabriel Grell
5. Center for Research and Exploration in Space Science and Technology, NASA/GSFC (CRESST II), Greenbelt, MD, USARalf Ballhausen, Rozenn Boissay-Malaquin, Kenji Hamaguchi, Takayuki Hayashi, Michael Loewenstein, François Mernier, Koji Mukai, Anna Ogorzalek, Katja Pottschmidt, Keisuke Tamura, Ayşegül Tümer, Tahir Yaqoob & Erin Boettcher
6. Department of Physics, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, JapanAya Bamba & Kouichi Hagino
7. Department of Physics, Technion, Haifa, IsraelEhud Behar
8. Center for Space Sciences and Technology, University of Maryland, Baltimore County, Baltimore, MD, USARozenn Boissay-Malaquin, Kenji Hamaguchi, Takayuki Hayashi, Koji Mukai, Katja Pottschmidt, Keisuke Tamura, Ayşegül Tümer & Tahir Yaqoob
9. Center for Astrophysics|Harvard-Smithsonian, Cambridge, MA, USALaura Brenneman, Adam Foster, Paul Plucinsky, Randall Smith & Peter Kosec
10. Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Los Angeles, CA, USAGregory V. Brown, Megan E. Eckart & Natalie Hell
11. Department of Astronomy, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USALia Corrales & Jon M. Miller
12. SRON Netherlands Institute for Space Research, Leiden, The NetherlandsElisa Costantini, Liyi Gu, Jelle Kaastra, Aurora Simionescu & Jacco Vink
13. European Southern Observatory, Garching, GermanyMaría Díaz Trigo
14. Centre for Extragalactic Astronomy, Department of Physics, University of Durham, Durham, UKChris Done
15. Institute of Space and Astronautical Science (ISAS), Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), Kanagawa, JapanTadayasu Dotani, Ken Ebisawa, Ryuichi Fujimoto, Kotaro Fukushima, Katsuhiro Hayashi, Daiki Ishi, Manabu Ishida, Yoshiaki Kanemaru, Yoshitomo Maeda, Shoji Ogawa, Hiromasa Suzuki, Makoto Tashiro, Yukikatsu Terada, Masahiro Tsujimoto, Nagomi Uchida, Shin Watanabe, Hiroya Yamaguchi, Noriko Yamasaki & Tessei Yoshida
16. Department of Economics, Kumamoto Gakuen University, Kumamoto, JapanSatoshi Eguchi
17. Department of Physics, Kyoto University, Kyoto, JapanTeruaki Enoto, Takeshi Tsuru & Hiroyuki Uchida
18. Department of Physics, Tokyo Metropolitan University, Tokyo, JapanYuichiro Ezoe, Yutaka Fujita, Kumi Ishikawa, Yoshitaka Ishisaki & Hiromi Seta
19. Department of Physics, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, JapanYasushi Fukazawa & Hiromitsu Takahashi
20. Department of Physics, Fujita Health University, Aichi, JapanAkihiro Furuzawa
21. Department of Astronomy and Physics, Saint Mary’s University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, CanadaLuigi Gallo
22. California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USAJavier A. García
23. European Space Agency (ESA), European Space Research and Technology Centre (ESTEC), Noordwijk, The NetherlandsMatteo Guainazzi
24. Faculty of Engineering, University of Miyazaki, Miyazaki, JapanIsamu Hatsukade, Koji Mori & Makoto Yamauchi
25. RIKEN Nishina Center, Saitama, JapanYuto Ichinohe & Toru Tamagawa
26. Leiden Observatory, Universiteit Leiden, Leiden, The NetherlandsJelle Kaastra
27. Kavli Institute for Astrophysics and Space Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USAErin Kara, Eric D. Miller & Peter Kosec
28. Department of Physics, Saitama University, Saitama, JapanSatoru Katsuda, Mai Takeo, Makoto Tashiro & Yukikatsu Terada
29. Department of Physics, Rikkyo University, Tokyo, JapanShunji Kitamoto, Makoto Sawada & Shinya Yamada
30. Faculty of Physics, Tokyo University of Science, Tokyo, JapanShogo Kobayashi & Kyoko Matsushita
31. Faculty of Science and Technology, Tokyo University of Science, Chiba, JapanTakayoshi Kohmura & Yuusuke Uchida
32. Department of Electronic Information Systems, Shibaura Institute of Technology, Saitama, JapanAya Kubota
33. Department of Earth and Space Science, Osaka University, Osaka, JapanHironori Matsumoto, Hirokazu Odaka & Hiroshi Tsunemi
34. Department of Physics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USADan McCammon
35. Department of Physics and Astronomy, Waterloo Centre for Astrophysics, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, CanadaBrian McNamara
36. Department of Physics, Nagoya University, Nagoya, JapanIkuyuki Mitsuishi, Kazuhiro Nakazawa, Kazutaka Yamaoka, Kazuki Ampuku & Seiya Sasamata
37. Science Research Education Unit, University of Teacher Education Fukuoka, Fukuoka, JapanMisaki Mizumoto
38. Hiroshima Astrophysical Science Center, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, JapanTsunefumi Mizuno
39. Department of Data Science, Tohoku Gakuin University, Sendai, JapanHiroshi Murakami
40. College of Science and Engineering, Kanto Gakuin University, Yokohama, JapanHiroshi Nakajima
41. European Space Agency (ESA), European Space Astronomy Centre (ESAC), Madrid, SpainJan-Uwe Ness
42. Department of Science, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Kindai University, Osaka, JapanKumiko Nobukawa
43. Department of Teacher Training and School Education, Nara University of Education, Nara, JapanMasayoshi Nobukawa
44. Astronomical Institute, Tohoku University, Sendai, JapanHirofumi Noda
45. Department of Physics, Nara Women’s University, Nara, JapanNaomi Ota & Shigeo Yamauchi
46. Department of Astrophysics and Atmospheric Sciences, Kyoto Sangyo University, Kyoto, JapanKosuke Sato
47. School of Science and Technology, Meiji University, Kawasaki, JapanToshiki Sato
48. Yale Center for Astronomy and Astrophysics, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USAAndrew Szymkowiak
49. Department of Physics, Konan University, Kobe, JapanTakaaki Tanaka
50. Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, JapanAtsushi Tanimoto & Tomokage Yoneyama
51. Department of Physics, Chuo University, Tokyo, JapanYohko Tsuboi
52. Faculty of Education, Shizuoka University, Shizuoka, JapanHideki Uchiyama
53. Department of Astronomy, Kyoto University, Kyoto, JapanYoshihiro Ueda
54. Nihon Fukushi University, Shizuoka, JapanShinichiro Uno
55. Anton Pannekoek Institute, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The NetherlandsJacco Vink
56. Frontier Research Institute for Interdisciplinary Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, JapanSatoshi Yamada
57. Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USAMihoko Yukita
58. Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USAIrina Zhuravleva
59. School of Earth and Space Exploration, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USASkylar Grayson & Evan Scannapieco

### Consortia

### XRISM Collaboration

* Marc Audard
* , Hisamitsu Awaki
* , Ralf Ballhausen
* , Aya Bamba
* , Ehud Behar
* , Rozenn Boissay-Malaquin
* , Laura Brenneman
* , Gregory V. Brown
* , Lia Corrales
* , Elisa Costantini
* , Renata Cumbee
* , María Díaz Trigo
* , Chris Done
* , Tadayasu Dotani
* , Ken Ebisawa
* , Megan E. Eckart
* , Dominique Eckert
* , Satoshi Eguchi
* , Teruaki Enoto
* , Yuichiro Ezoe
* , Adam Foster
* , Ryuichi Fujimoto
* , Yutaka Fujita
* , Yasushi Fukazawa
* , Kotaro Fukushima
* , Akihiro Furuzawa
* , Luigi Gallo
* , Javier A. García
* , Liyi Gu
* , Matteo Guainazzi
* , Kouichi Hagino
* , Kenji Hamaguchi
* , Isamu Hatsukade
* , Katsuhiro Hayashi
* , Takayuki Hayashi
* , Natalie Hell
* , Edmund Hodges-Kluck
* , Ann Hornschemeier
* , Yuto Ichinohe
* , Daiki Ishi
* , Manabu Ishida
* , Kumi Ishikawa
* , Yoshitaka Ishisaki
* , Jelle Kaastra
* , Timothy Kallman
* , Erin Kara
* , Satoru Katsuda
* , Yoshiaki Kanemaru
* , Richard Kelley
* , Caroline Kilbourne
* , Shunji Kitamoto
* , Shogo Kobayashi
* , Takayoshi Kohmura
* , Aya Kubota
* , Maurice Leutenegger
* , Michael Loewenstein
* , Yoshitomo Maeda
* , Maxim Markevitch
* , Hironori Matsumoto
* , Kyoko Matsushita
* , Dan McCammon
* , Brian McNamara
* , François Mernier
* , Eric D. Miller
* , Jon M. Miller
* , Ikuyuki Mitsuishi
* , Misaki Mizumoto
* , Tsunefumi Mizuno
* , Koji Mori
* , Koji Mukai
* , Hiroshi Murakami
* , Richard Mushotzky
* , Hiroshi Nakajima
* , Kazuhiro Nakazawa
* , Jan-Uwe Ness
* , Kumiko Nobukawa
* , Masayoshi Nobukawa
* , Hirofumi Noda
* , Hirokazu Odaka
* , Shoji Ogawa
* , Anna Ogorzalek
* , Takashi Okajima
* , Naomi Ota
* , Stephane Paltani
* , Robert Petre
* , Paul Plucinsky
* , Frederick S. Porter
* , Katja Pottschmidt
* , Kosuke Sato
* , Toshiki Sato
* , Makoto Sawada
* , Hiromi Seta
* , Megumi Shidatsu
* , Aurora Simionescu
* , Randall Smith
* , Hiromasa Suzuki
* , Andrew Szymkowiak
* , Hiromitsu Takahashi
* , Mai Takeo
* , Toru Tamagawa
* , Keisuke Tamura
* , Takaaki Tanaka
* , Atsushi Tanimoto
* , Makoto Tashiro
* , Yukikatsu Terada
* , Yuichi Terashima
* , Yohko Tsuboi
* , Masahiro Tsujimoto
* , Hiroshi Tsunemi
* , Takeshi Tsuru
* , Ayşegül Tümer
* , Hiroyuki Uchida
* , Nagomi Uchida
* , Yuusuke Uchida
* , Hideki Uchiyama
* , Yoshihiro Ueda
* , Shinichiro Uno
* , Jacco Vink
* , Shin Watanabe
* , Brian J. Williams
* , Satoshi Yamada
* , Shinya Yamada
* , Hiroya Yamaguchi
* , Kazutaka Yamaoka
* , Noriko Yamasaki
* , Makoto Yamauchi
* , Shigeo Yamauchi
* , Tahir Yaqoob
* , Tomokage Yoneyama
* , Tessei Yoshida
* , Mihoko Yukita
* , Irina Zhuravleva
* , Kazuki Ampuku
* , Erin Boettcher
* , Skylar Grayson
* , Gabriel Grell
* , Peter Kosec
* , Seiya Sasamata
* & Evan Scannapieco

### Contributions

E. Hodges-Kluck, I. Mitsuishi, T. Tsuru and N. Yamasaki conceived of the programme and planned the observation. M. Yukita reduced the data, and C. Kilbourne and M. Loewenstein performed data quality checks. E. Boettcher, E. Hodges-Kluck and M. Yukita performed spectral fitting of the Resolve data and led the analysis of the wind temperature, velocity, mass and energy outflow rates, and thermalization efficiency. G. Grell performed Resolve spectral fitting to place a limit on the very hot wind. E. Hodges-Kluck analysed archival Chandra data and the coordinated Swift observation, and M. Yukita jointly analysed the Resolve data and archival NuSTAR data. S. Grayson and E. Scannapieco performed the free-wind modelling. E. Boettcher led the preparation of the manuscript. K. Ampuku, R. Cumbee, A. Foster, Y. Fujita, K. Fukushima, A. Hornschemeier, R. Kelley, S. Kobayashi and S. Sasamata contributed to discussions in regular meetings of the XRISM M82 Target Team. T. Sato and J. Vink served as internal reviewers. The science goals of XRISM were discussed and developed over 7 years by the XRISM Science Team, all members of which are authors of this manuscript. All the instruments were prepared by the joint efforts of the team. The manuscript was subject to an internal, collaboration-wide review process. All authors reviewed and approved the final version of the manuscript.

### Corresponding author

Correspondence toErin Boettcher.

## Ethics declarations

### Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

## Peer review

### Peer review information

Naturethanks Laura Lopez, Sebastian Lopez and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.Peer reviewer reportsare available.

## Additional information

Publisher’s noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

## Extended data figures and tables

### Extended Data Fig. 1 The starburst nucleus of M82.

The nucleus falls fully within the Resolve field of view (\({3}^{{\prime} }\times {3}^{{\prime} }=3\,{\rm{k}}{\rm{p}}{\rm{c}}\times 3\,{\rm{k}}{\rm{p}}{\rm{c}}\); black outline ina), with the excluded pixel 27 shaded in gray). A Chandra ACIS-S narrowband image shows that the hottest gas traced by Fexxv6.7 keV emission (white contours inb) is largely contained within an ellipsoidal thermalization zone (purple region in cartoon inc), where star clusters demarcated by Hiiregions (gray clouds) shock-heat ambient medium bounded in the plane of the galaxy by a molecular torus22(white ring, shown as a cross-section). The torus reduces the fraction of the hot wind that can freely stream (arrows in cartoon), producing the biconical outflow seen in softer emission lines by Chandra (red regions). The spatial extent of Sixiv2.0 keV emission (R≲1 kpc, Chandra narrowband image inaandb) is representative of theE< 4 keV emission lines seen by Resolve, including Sxv2.4 keV, Sxvi2.6 keV, and Arxvii3.1 keV. Softer X-ray emission represented by the Oviii0.65 keV contour plot inais extended toR≳2 kpc. Point sources have been masked in Chandra images. The blue arrows lie along the major axis of the galaxy.

## Supplementary information

### Supplementary Information (download PDF)

Supplementary Text and References.

### Peer Review File (download PDF)

## Source data

### Source Data Fig. 1 (download XLSX)

### Source Data Fig. 3 (download XLSX)

## Rights and permissions

Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.

Reprints and permissions

## About this article

### Cite this article

XRISM Collaboration. A fast starburst wind consumes most of the energy from supernovae.Nature651, 909–913 (2026). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-026-10231-1

Download citation

* Received:16 June 2025
* Accepted:04 February 2026
* Published:25 March 2026
* Version of record:25 March 2026
* Issue date:26 March 2026
* DOI:https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-026-10231-1

### Share this article

Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:

Get shareable link

Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.

Copy shareable link to clipboard

Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative
