---
title: 'Ask HN: Please restrict new accounts from posting | Hacker News'
url: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47300329
site_name: hnrss
content_file: hnrss-ask-hn-please-restrict-new-accounts-from-posting-h
fetched_at: '2026-03-09T07:24:56.318596'
original_url: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47300329
date: '2026-03-08'
description: 'Ask HN: Please restrict new accounts from posting'
tags:
- hackernews
- hnrss
---

Hacker News
new
 |
past
 |
comments
 |
ask
 |
show
 |
jobs
 |
submit
login
Ask HN: Please restrict new accounts from posting
101 points
 by
Oras

57 minutes ago

 |
hide
 |
past
 |
favorite
 |
72 comments
I don’t know if I’m the only one, but I see lots of clearly AI generated posts recently in HN and mostly coming from new accounts (green), it is more noticeable in the Show HN section.

I wish the team can either restrict new accounts from posting or at least offer a default filtering where I can only see posts from accounts with certain criteria.I don’t want to see HN becoming twitter, which is full of bots and noise, as this would be a really sad day.

 
help

dang

24 minutes ago

 |
next

[–]

We're going to at least restrict Show HNs for a while.

I do think this is relevant though: "HN can't be immune from macro trends" -https://hn.algolia.com/?dateRange=all&page=0&prefix=true&que...

reply

Oras

22 minutes ago

 |
parent
 |
next

[–]

For all accounts or just new ones?

reply

dang

19 minutes ago

 |
root
 |
parent
 |
next

[–]

Just new ones for now.

I don't want to make HN harder for legit new users, but I do think a bit of community participation is reasonable before posting a Show HN, so it isn't just a box on some "how to promote your project" checklist.

reply

wormpilled

13 minutes ago

 |
root
 |
parent
 |
next

[–]

It's really hurting the brand. I can't remember the last time I bothered to even check that index. I used to check it all the time.

reply

ludicrousdispla

15 minutes ago

 |
parent
 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

i like your humor

reply

alabhyajindal

23 minutes ago

 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

100%. Not sure what the solution is but I have lost interest in Show HNs these days. Part of it is because when someone posted before, it usually meant they spent a fair amount of time thinking, and found it worthwhile to spend energy on the project. This was a nice first filter for bad ideas and now no longer exists.

Even for posts that are interesting to me, I get the feeling that it's not worth looking at because it was probably made using LLMs. Nothing against them, but I personally thought of Show HNs as doing something for the love of it, the end result being a bonus.

reply

BalinKing

42 minutes ago

 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

I furthermore wish that "posting an LLM-generated comment (i.e. and passing it off as your own)" was worthy of an instant ban, because I see this sort of behavior from non-green accounts as well.

EDIT: I meant (but totally forgot) to qualify that my "proposal" would only apply when the LLM-ness is self-obvious—idk, make up a "reasonable person" standard or something. Presumably, the moderators would err on the side of letting things slide. Even so, many comments I've seen are simply impossible for any reasonable person to claim as "human-written"—the default ChatGPT style is simply too distinct.

reply

tasuki

2 minutes ago

 |
parent
 |
next

[–]

I think your comment was generated by an LLM and hereby vote for your immediate and permanent instant ban.

reply

delichon

40 minutes ago

 |
parent
 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

The moderators are supposed to just know it when they see it? It's that black and white to you? Or are lots of false positives a price we have to pay?

reply

andai

19 minutes ago

 |
root
 |
parent
 |
next

[–]

Yeah it's weird, there was one case where I thought it was AI but wasn't sure. Several other comments pointed it out, too. Author claimed he wrote it manually. (Which is honestly even more concerning!)

Maybe there can be a dedicated 'flag botspam' button?Then again it's a nuanced issue. I see AI used in a large percentage of writing now, so would this rule apply to the article as well?

reply

lokar

35 minutes ago

 |
root
 |
parent
 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

It’s only going to get harder has people continue to model their writing on LLM style.

reply

robotresearcher

21 minutes ago

 |
root
 |
parent
 |
next

[–]

You're absolutely right.

reply

bluefirebrand

30 minutes ago

 |
root
 |
parent
 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

I guess it's been fun but the internet is well and truly dead

If not already, then soon

reply

BalinKing

9 minutes ago

 |
root
 |
parent
 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

Sorry, updated my original comment—I meant to qualify it to only those cases where it's blatantly obvious. Obviously a lot of ambiguous comments will slip through as a result, but I agree with you that false negatives are better than false positives.

reply

Gabrys1

22 minutes ago

 |
root
 |
parent
 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

Can use AI to detect that

reply

heavyset_go

29 minutes ago

 |
parent
 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

Do this with submissions, too. Or at least put some indicator that it's AI generated.

reply

mapontosevenths

24 minutes ago

 |
root
 |
parent
 |
next

[–]

I am more annoyed by the anti-AI luddites filling the comments with low value complaints than I am by quality content written partially by an LLM.

Those low value complaints add nothing to the conversation, and the content didnt make it to the front page because it was bad. If the sole objection is "AI bad", keep it to yourself....its boring.

reply

ryandrake

0 minutes ago

 |
root
 |
parent
 |
next

[–]

In every single article's comments now, there's always
someone
 coming out of the woodwork to post "This article is written by LLM." These comments are about as useless as "The website's color scheme is annoying" and "The website breaks the [back button | scrollbar]." (which, by the way, are not allowed per the HN guidelines[1])

If anything should be banned, it's low-effort "This is AI" commentary. It adds absolute zero to the conversation.1:https://news.ycombinator.com/newsguidelines.htmlPlease don't complain about tangential annoyances—e.g. article or website formats, name collisions, or back-button breakage. They're too common to be interesting.I'd argue whether or not the article (or reply) was written by AI is a tangential annoyance at this point.

BalinKing

5 minutes ago

 |
root
 |
parent
 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

I think a steelman interpretation of the parent is that
entirely
 LLM-generated projects should be disallowed. There's a lot of submissions on Show HN that seem completely vibe-coded to me (like, including the README), which is a very different situation IMO from someone who simply used Claude to write some—or even most—of the code. When even the human-facing portion of a submission is LLM-generated, it bothers a lot of people (myself included).

reply

heavyset_go

17 minutes ago

 |
root
 |
parent
 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

Without engaging in more ad hominem, that are wrong by the way, what's the issue with labeling AI content with what it is?

reply

bryanlarsen

2 minutes ago

 |
root
 |
parent
 |
next

[–]

It's one thing to have an AI-label. It's another to completely derail a conversation with a likely false AI accusation.

Example:https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47122272You have to scroll a few pages before the actual article is discussed."This was LLM generated" is likely to float to the top of an article. That's where the best comments about the article deserve to go, not an off topic comment. An AI label should be much less obtrusive.

ThrowawayR2

34 minutes ago

 |
parent
 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

The guidelines haven't even been updated to say that AI generated posts and submission aren't permitted even though it's been the policy for a couple of years now if one searches for postings by the moderators. So outsiders and new HN users have no reason to know that it's not allowed. I'm sure there are reasons for it but the inaction is all very mysterious from an outsider perspective.

reply

castral

34 minutes ago

 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

I don't understand how this is supposed to solve anything, and I've seen it suggested as a solution multiple times. If you restrict comments to older accounts, all it's going to do is make the bot creators speculatively open and proactively age accounts for future use.

reply

kn100

29 minutes ago

 |
parent
 |
next

[–]

I would argue that we shouldn't let the perfect be the enemy of the good. Adding a cost to commenting that requires aging accounts I think might discourage fly by night operations and "experiments".

reply

Oras

29 minutes ago

 |
parent
 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

I wish for karma based too if we managed to get filters. I want to see posts only by accounts with {x}+ karma points.

reply

Springtime

23 minutes ago

 |
root
 |
parent
 |
next

[–]

Would be fine for a personal filter but if used globally would incentivize karma gaming. You can get high karma from reposts of past popular submissions (an author who was in prison who reached the front page even half-joked/resented once how many common Wikipedia articles land on the front page for the nth time).

reply

bmacho

26 minutes ago

 |
root
 |
parent
 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

You can ask claude to create a userscript for that. Maintain a database of acccepted users, check new users, don't show low karma users.

reply

elpocko

18 minutes ago

 |
root
 |
parent
 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

You want other people to deal with the things you don't like and filter stuff for you, to improve your own experience and shield you from the filthy masses. God beware you have to endure a comment you don't like, your royal highness.

I'd rather see you gone than the people you complain about.

reply

Springtime

9 minutes ago

 |
root
 |
parent
 |
next

[–]

Filtering is a valid form of improving signals. If there there was a reliable heuristic for users posting low effort content that was better then the user would be considering that instead.

If someone in a chatroom for example is being spammy with their messages at the expense of noticing posts one finds more relevant then blocking them isn't due to considering them some filthy pleb but improving their experience. If the user being filtered never becomes aware there's no reason to be offended, either.Edit: also I wasn't the one to downvote you if that makes any difference.

reply

elpocko

2 minutes ago

 |
root
 |
parent
 |
next

[–]

HN is already heavily moderated. Low-effort posters and spammers get downranked immediately, based on their behavior. OP is simply intolerant and unable to function in a social setting.

What would happen ifevery single userenabled their minimum karma filter?

andai

22 minutes ago

 |
parent
 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

Several of the posts I've seen are from autonomous AI agents, which don't currently seem to have that kind of long-term planning.

reply

dang

18 minutes ago

 |
parent
 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

And also invest more effort in karma farming. In other words, if we raise the bar for Show HNs we'll probably see more generated comments in the threads.

reply

dom96

22 minutes ago

 |
parent
 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

My prediction is that nothing short of human verification is going to solve this.

reply

_alternator_

36 minutes ago

 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

Devils advocate take: I think the quality of the ShowHN projects are in fact getting higher, at least the ones that land in the front page. The issue is that projects that used to take weeks, months, or even years of work now can be done in a weekend or so. It’s been democratizing, but it also means that when we look at these posts we (rightly) see that these new projects aren’t that much effort _with AI assistance_.

So maybe we should just be honest about this: our standards have raised. We want to see Show HN posts that require effort and dedication, that require more than a few hours of prompt flogging.

reply

Oras

33 minutes ago

 |
parent
 |
next

[–]

But the issue is not only show HN, even generic posts are increasingly from new accounts, some of them are reaching front page too.

One example:https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=46884481

reply

heavyset_go

21 minutes ago

 |
root
 |
parent
 |
next

[–]

This made the frontpage two days ago:
https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=47275291

Read the comments and you'll see it took time and effort, from people who know at least a little about what they're saying, to point out that it's AI slop that doesn't live up to the claims written in its own docs.

reply

monster_truck

19 minutes ago

 |
parent
 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

I disagree in that the last few I can think of have involved things like services that do not really explain what they do properly and then ask for full permissions to your github account, or claim to be far more than they are (ie "I made this thing" but it's just a shim for someone else's stuff).

reply

pluc

31 minutes ago

 |
parent
 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

Well it's not just that... picture a community group talking among themselves and then some rando shows up, yells "I built this thing that you all might like", hangs out for an hour and then is never heard from again.

I think that's great in moderation as it stimulates ideas and discussions, shows us what folks are working on, etc... but this can't become Product Hunt. The reasons for posting here should be vastly different than posting on Product Hunt.

reply

andai

21 minutes ago

 |
parent
 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

I was thinking about this the other day. If someone made TempleOS today, people wouldn't be as impressed, because they'd just assume they used AI.

They'd assume this, even if they hadn't used AI, and even if AI didn't have to ability to pull it off.

reply

Springtime

17 minutes ago

 |
root
 |
parent
 |
next

[–]

That dev made many videos about its creation and motivations though and along with their personality I think people would be understanding.

reply

krapp

26 minutes ago

 |
parent
 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

Except the quality hasn't been getting higher. Most of those projects wouldn't be considered HN worthy if a human being had made them, they only get the praise they do because they were generated by an LLM and as such they aren't projects so much as demonstrations of the latest model's capabilities.

Also the purpose of Show HN along with HN in general is to spark intellectual curiosity and create interesting conversation, and nothing about LLM generated code does that, because the person who prompted the AI to make it doesn't understand it and can't discuss it in any depth.

reply

bdcravens

6 minutes ago

 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

It's not like older accounts are necessarily any better.

If you look at the leader board (https://news.ycombinator.com/leaders), you'll find a few old accounts that pretty much do nothing but farm links, posting sometimes dozens of times a day, with a very low percentage of comments. Their high "score" isn't an indicator of quality; they just spam enough that a few get some good upvotes, but most of their submissions are low quality.

reply

neom

35 minutes ago

 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

I almost emailed dang this morning to offer to help out tho I'm not particularly technical. Few solutions I thought of: 1 - honeypot, hide some links llms can follow if stuff gets posted in it, unlikely to be a human. 2 - Make an captcha that
only
 llms can answer, I recently made 2 social networks, one that humans couldn't join by making the submission question too difficult to figure out quickly. 3- Use an LLM to detect LLMs, the other social network I did for fun (that a small number of people use), an llm that looks for moderation issues does a good job of flagging them. 4- Invites but vary the number you have to give out by account age + karma. The first 3 seem like they'd stop some % for some time, but eventually get old.

reply

fragmede

29 minutes ago

 |
parent
 |
next

[–]

Reverse captchas are fun. Click this button 10,000 times to prove that you're a robot!

reply

neural_thing

22 minutes ago

 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

Eventually HN is going to need to charge people $1 to post, just for spam filtering. Maybe donate the money to open source or something.

reply

Kim_Bruning

4 minutes ago

 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

I would actually expect Openclaw bots to be showing up here from time to time now, since there's no explicit documented policy against them.

reply

amadeuspagel

40 minutes ago

 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

Let's turn HN into a place where we all grow old together until it slowly dies when we do.

reply

bmacho

28 minutes ago

 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

Accounts have to start posting somewhen.

Moderators don't have the capacity (and fairly, it is impossible) to check if they are bots or humans.There are no good solutions, there are hundreds of thousands of intelligences out there, trained millions of hours on how to scam humans, capable of spitting out text tirelessly and shamelessly, and there will be only more of them, tens, hundreds, thousands times more.

reply

ThrowawayR2

29 minutes ago

 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

I'd suggest instead a lower threshold for [dead]-ing posts and submissions by new accounts when flagged by HN users.

reply

Lerc

16 minutes ago

 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

There have been numerous stories on HN where someone directly involved with the story has created an account specifically to engage in discussion about whatever the story was about.

Losing that seems too high of a price to pay. Yes there are AI generated comments, in the past there has been script generated comments. You can report, downvote, or just ignore and move on. I am aware of posts like this existing, but I feel they are being effectively managed.Try not to be too offended about the notion of these posts existing. Many of them are not malicious, they just caused by users stepping outside what is considered appropriate, but in a landscape where the footing is quite dynamic, everyone is making their own judgement calls in a field where the consensus is not clear, guidance seems more appropriate than punishment here.

reply

gus_massa

2 minutes ago

 |
parent
 |
next

[–]

>
There have been numerous stories on HN where someone directly involved with the story has created an account specifically to engage in discussion about whatever the story was about.

Yes, and sometimes some of the HN automatic filters kills the comments. Remember to "vouch" the comments if they are interesting/relevant, a few "vouches" unkill the comments. And in extreme cases, send an email to hn@ycombinator.com so dang/tomhow can take a look and use some magic to fix the problem.

reply

krapp

6 minutes ago

 |
parent
 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

>Losing that seems too high of a price to pay.

Assuming the mods just auto-ban new accounts and require them to be vouched and to earn minimum karma before being visible, those comments can be vouched up or approved by the moderators. The poster won't know that they've been banned, of course, because that's how shadowbanning works, so the approval process should be seamless for them.But how often does that happen versus the AI comments and alt account trolling?>but in a landscape where the footing is quite dynamic, everyone is making their own judgement calls in a field where the consensus is not clear, guidance seems more appropriate than punishment here.The consensus is and has always been clear. Generated comments of any kind have never been allowed. People just don't care, and that's a problem.And those comments are malicious in effect if not intent. We're here to have conversations with human beings, the intellectual and emotional connection is important. What is the point of having conversations with a machine, much lessnot knowingone is having a conversation with a machine? If nothing else, it's dehumanizing and a waste of time.

reply

delichon

28 minutes ago

 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

There is an epistemic silver lining. This is in fact a Red Queen's race that cannot be won. So in the end the only solution is to evaluate the text on its own merits without reference to the writer's status, because that status can no longer be reliably detected. For a public feed like this one, the only alternative is to ignore it. The fire hose of data will inevitably become ever more fecal. We can only walk away from it or be more careful about the pearls we pluck out. It ends well only if we get better at pearl detection.

reply

saulpw

23 minutes ago

 |
parent
 |
next

[–]

"cannot be won" "only solution" "only alternative". sorry, no, that's too black and white. There are other solutions, even if they will only work for a couple of days/months/years.

reply

bakugo

21 minutes ago

 |
parent
 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

> So in the end the only solution is to evaluate the text on its own merits

This falls apart as soon as you realize that evaluating the text requires far more effort than generating it. If you're spending 2 minutes reading text that took 2 seconds to generate, you already lost.

reply

delichon

12 minutes ago

 |
root
 |
parent
 |
next

[–]

That just means that you can only evaluate a smaller fraction of the data. If your goal is to do more than sample it, you've already lost.

reply

regera

7 minutes ago

 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

Resistance is futile.

reply

abtinf

28 minutes ago

 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

I really wish there was a setting whereby I could simply hide all
comments
 from accounts less than a year old. The correlation with LLM slop is simply off the charts.

It almost feels like new accounts should be treated like new posts -- it is sort of a service that a select few are willing to undertake to upvote interesting stories early on.I wish even more I could block specific users (there are some highly prolific, high karma users here who are extremely irritating), but that's harder and is probably best handled client side.

reply

neom

16 minutes ago

 |
parent
 |
next

[–]

I have a chrome plugin I made that gives me some personal social features (tagging people), it can block:
https://s.h4x.club/yAuNoQDe

reply

ohyoutravel

10 minutes ago

 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

It’s getting really bad. New accounts hours old posting walls of AI-generated garbage comments across dozens of topics. Please restrict new posters, minimally, and perhaps add a little friction to new account sign ups.

reply

DetroitThrow

11 minutes ago

 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

It used to be so pleasant to read Show HN and find such interesting projects, but nowadays it's rare that any project posting their GitHub has ever read their source code or even comes close to functioning in the way the OP claims.

Such a sad development.

reply

cebert

49 minutes ago

 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

HN does a good job moderating and blocking spam from new accounts.

reply

furyofantares

45 minutes ago

 |
parent
 |
next

[–]

Used to. The job has apparently gotten a lot harder now.

reply

verdverm

38 minutes ago

 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

This is largely the same pattern that happened during the crypto hype cycle, spam posts and complaints. It will likely subside as reality sinks in.

There are still quality submissions by new accounts and HN is good at pulling those needles from the haystack.

reply

SG-

56 minutes ago

 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

I'm honestly surprised HN isn't used to share more malware/githubs with new accounts too.

reply

anonym29

30 minutes ago

 |
parent
 |
next

[–]

The target audience for malware authors/distributors typically isn't a community full of technically literate software engineers, security practitioners, reverse engineers, malware analysts, etc.

Same reason that burglars don't typically target security camera stores and robbers don't typically target police departments - it's basically a fast-track to early detection, which disrupts the main objective of the adversary.

reply

toomuchtodo

45 minutes ago

 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

“shownew” : “no|yes” option would be nice.

reply

gnabgib

35 minutes ago

 |
parent
 |
next

[–]

If everyone turned off new account visibility, we'd just see the same noise 30 days later.. not sure that helps.

reply

refulgentis

28 minutes ago

 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

I'm honestly surprised how well it's going.

From the perspective of usually just swinging into a post from the front page, when I do see green, it's usually overtly political trolling, and dead from the start. So I had assumed new account = no one sees your post in gray, at least for a week or two.I don't envy the "Show HN:" case. It can be intractable, story time:Last week, there was a "Show HN:" post for a GitHub link, made it all the way to #2. It was a Flutter app, written up as if it did all the stuff you'd want from an open source LLM client. I said to myself "geez, I knew I took to long to deliver the thing I've been working on for 2 years. the MVP version is insanely popular."-- only after digging into the repo for 10 minutes, with domain expertise, did I realize it was a complete Potemkin village, built by Claude. And even then, I was afraid to post something pointing this out because it required domain expertise, and it could have read as negative rather than principled.All that to say, some subsets of The AI Poster problem now require having intimate domain expertise and 10 minutes to evaluate it. :/Additionally, the Claude 4.6s and GPT-5.4s arebetter than meat posting on HN now. :/ And I've been here 16 years. The last week pretty much every single one of my comments has been written by Opus 4.6 or GPT-5.4, via: 1) dump HN post into prompt 2) say "I feel $X about this, write me an HN post that communicates this but not negatively".I'm a little ashamed to admit if you look through my post history, you'll definitely see a repeated pattern over 16 years of someone who is very negative and has a hard time communicating it constructively. They're smart enough now to extrapolate observations in the way I want to, while avoiding my own tarpits.

reply

neom

9 minutes ago

 |
parent
 |
next

[–]

My only problem with the last part is that your tarpits are you, and personally: I want to know you, not some version of you filtered or softened by AI. That to me is what makes HN great, how...jarring the reading experience can be, it's really fun and interesting to see how people communicate their ideas - I think it's admirable that you're making an effort to become more kind and communicate more positively, but fingers cross you don't lose "your voice"! :)

reply

saltyoldman

47 minutes ago

 |
prev
 |
next

[–]

Amen. I think the purpose of the bots is to create high-upvoted accounts for the purpose of later flag and downvoting things they've programmed the bots to suppress.

reply

mmaunder

10 minutes ago

 |
prev

[–]

That's one way to block those pesky young innovators from trampling our lawn.

reply

Guidelines
 |
FAQ
 |
Lists
 |
API
 |
Security
 |
Legal
 |
Apply to YC
 |
Contact

Search:
