---
title: 'docs: define policy forbidding use of AI code generators · qemu/qemu@3d40db0 · GitHub'
url: https://github.com/qemu/qemu/commit/3d40db0efc22520fa6c399cf73960dced423b048
site_name: hackernews_api
fetched_at: '2025-06-27T01:05:33.970725'
original_url: https://github.com/qemu/qemu/commit/3d40db0efc22520fa6c399cf73960dced423b048
author: todsacerdoti
date: '2025-06-26'
description: 'Official QEMU mirror. Please see https://www.qemu.org/contribute/ for how to submit changes to QEMU. Pull Requests are ignored. Please only use release tarballs from the QEMU website. - docs: define policy forbidding use of AI code generators · qemu/qemu@3d40db0'
tags:
- hackernews
- trending
---

qemu



/

qemu

Public

* NotificationsYou must be signed in to change notification settings
* Fork6k
* Star11.6k




## File tree

Expand file tree
Collapse file tree

## 1filechanged

+
54
-
1
lines changed
Filter options
* docs/develcode-provenance.rst
* code-provenance.rst
Expand file tree
Collapse file tree

## 1filechanged

+
54
-
1
lines changed

### ‎docs/devel/code-provenance.rst

Copy file name to clipboard
Expand all lines: docs/devel/code-provenance.rst
+
54
-
1
Lines changed: 54 additions & 1 deletion

Original file line number
Diff line number
Diff line change
@@ -282,4 +282,57 @@ boilerplate code template which is then filled in to produce the final patch.
282
282
The output of such a tool would still be considered the "preferred format",
283
283
since it is intended to be a foundation for further human authored changes.
284
284
Such tools are acceptable to use, provided there is clearly defined copyright
285
-
and licensing for their output.
285
+
and licensing for their output. Note in particular the caveats applying to AI
286
+
content generators below.
287
+
288
+
Use of AI content generators
289
+
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
290
+
291
+
TL;DR:
292
+
293
+
 **
Current QEMU project policy is to DECLINE any contributions which are
294
+
 believed to include or derive from AI generated content. This includes
295
+
 ChatGPT, Claude, Copilot, Llama and similar tools.
**
296
+
297
+
The increasing prevalence of AI-assisted software development results in a
298
+
number of difficult legal questions and risks for software projects, including
299
+
QEMU. Of particular concern is content generated by `
Large Language Models
300
+
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Large_language_model>
`__ (LLMs).
301
+
302
+
The QEMU community requires that contributors certify their patch submissions
303
+
are made in accordance with the rules of the `
Developer's Certificate of
304
+
Origin (DCO) <dco>
`.
305
+
306
+
To satisfy the DCO, the patch contributor has to fully understand the
307
+
copyright and license status of content they are contributing to QEMU. With AI
308
+
content generators, the copyright and license status of the output is
309
+
ill-defined with no generally accepted, settled legal foundation.
310
+
311
+
Where the training material is known, it is common for it to include large
312
+
volumes of material under restrictive licensing/copyright terms. Even where
313
+
the training material is all known to be under open source licenses, it is
314
+
likely to be under a variety of terms, not all of which will be compatible
315
+
with QEMU's licensing requirements.
316
+
317
+
How contributors could comply with DCO terms (b) or (c) for the output of AI
318
+
content generators commonly available today is unclear. The QEMU project is
319
+
not willing or able to accept the legal risks of non-compliance.
320
+
321
+
The QEMU project thus requires that contributors refrain from using AI content
322
+
generators on patches intended to be submitted to the project, and will
323
+
decline any contribution if use of AI is either known or suspected.
324
+
325
+
This policy does not apply to other uses of AI, such as researching APIs or
326
+
algorithms, static analysis, or debugging, provided their output is not to be
327
+
included in contributions.
328
+
329
+
Examples of tools impacted by this policy includes GitHub's CoPilot, OpenAI's
330
+
ChatGPT, Anthropic's Claude, and Meta's Code Llama, and code/content
331
+
generation agents which are built on top of such tools.
332
+
333
+
This policy may evolve as AI tools mature and the legal situation is
334
+
clarifed. In the meanwhile, requests for exceptions to this policy will be
335
+
evaluated by the QEMU project on a case by case basis. To be granted an
336
+
exception, a contributor will need to demonstrate clarity of the license and
337
+
copyright status for the tool's output in relation to its training model and
338
+
code, to the satisfaction of the project maintainers.
