---
title: 'Ozzy Osbourne death: Black Sabbath bandmates pay tribute - updates - BBC News'
url: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/live/cn0qq5nyxn0t
site_name: hackernews_api
fetched_at: '2025-07-22T23:07:43.166771'
original_url: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/live/cn0qq5nyxn0t
author: fantunes
date: '2025-07-22'
description: Black Sabbath "have lost our brother", says band's co-founder, weeks after farewell gig in their home city Birmingham.
tags:
- hackernews
- trending
---

## Summary

* Ozzy Osbourne, the frontman of pioneering heavy metal band Black Sabbath, has diedin the UKat the age of 76
* Black Sabbath"have lost our brother", says the band's co-founder Tony Iommi, while bassistTerence "Geezer" Butlerremembered their final gig and drummerBill Ward shared a photoof them together
* Osbourne's death comes just weeks afterthe band played their farewell gigin his home city of Birmingham
* Queen'sBrian May,Elton John,Rod Stewart,Metallica, the Rolling Stones'Ronnie WoodandYungbludall pay tribute
* Osbourne, who wasdiagnosed with Parkinson's in 2019,was known forenergetic and controversial live shows- while many fans also got to know him through reality TV showThe Osbournes

## Live Reporting

Edited by Brandon Livesay and Chris Graham

1. Image source,Getty ImagesImage caption,AC/DC guitarist Angus Young with Ozzy OsbourneThe Instagram account for AC/DC posted a tribute to Ozzy on social media moments ago."So sad! A great loss to all that loved him," the post said.Shareclose panelShare pageCopy linkAbout sharing
2. Image source,Kevin Winter/Getty ImagesImage caption,Henry Rollins says with Osbourne, "what you saw was what you got".Henry Rollins, who fronted the California hardcore band Black Flag and went on to become a well-known actor, believes one of the reasons Osbourne was so loved around the world was because he "was incredibly genuine"."With Ozzy, what you saw was what you got," he told BBC's Newshour on the World Service. "The guy on stage, that's really him, and that's how he was off stage as well. Just a genuinely good guy with an incredible amount of charisma."Referring to Ozzy's famed excesses of drugs, booze and the infamous incident where he bit off the head of a bat, Rollins said he "was a wild guy, but not wild and mean. When Ozzy did stuff like that, you're like, well, you're doing it so I don't have to".Rollins said underlying Black Sabbath's heavy sound, there was a foundation of genuine love: "The word love came out of his mouth on stage over and over and over again... How can you not like that?"Shareclose panelShare pageCopy linkAbout sharing
3. ## To play this video you need to enable JavaScript in your browser.This video can not be playedMedia caption,Ozzy Osbourne was 'much less scary' than you expect, Variety's Jem Aswad saysVariety magazine's senior entertainment editor Jem Aswad says the first time he met Osbourne, he was "nervous" to meet the Prince of Darkness."It was just this sort of really bizarre scene," Aswad tells the BBC.Osbourne entered the room about 11:00 in a bathrobe, having "just woken up", wearing loads of jewellery and accessories and "a lot of gold", Aswad recalls.But, he says, Osbourne was "perfectly nice, perfectly friendly".Listen to more of Aswad's memories of hanging out with Osbourne in the video above.Shareclose panelShare pageCopy linkAbout sharing
4. Black Sabbath drummer Bill Ward said it's "never goodbye" in a tribute post to Osbourne on social media that included a photo of the two together."Where will I find you now? In the memories, our unspoken embraces, our missed phone calls, no, you’re forever in my heart," Ward said on X."Deepest condolences to Sharon and all family members. RIP Sincere regrets to all the fans. Never goodbye. Thank you forever."Image source,Bill Ward/XShareclose panelShare pageCopy linkAbout sharing
5. Sony Music has released a statement on Osbourne's death, saying “his music will live on". Osbourne was signed to Epic Records, a label owned by Sony."Sony Music is deeply saddened by the passing of our legendary recording artist Ozzy Osbourne," the statement said."He redefined the sound and spirit of rock music and became an unmistakable voice and icon for his millions of fans around the world!"Shareclose panelShare pageCopy linkAbout sharing
6. Image source,ANDY BUCHANAN/AFP via Getty ImagesImage caption,Anthrax played as a support act at Black Sabbath's farewell gigUS metal band Anthrax paid tribute to the Osbourne, saying it was an "honour" to perform at his farewell concert earlier this month. They said the genre of heavy metal was Black Sabbath's "ultimate creation"."Like so many around the world, today's news hit us with truly insane shock and sadness," the band wrote on Instagram."Ozzy, thank you for everything. Simply put, none of us would be us without you."Shareclose panelShare pageCopy linkAbout sharing
7. Mark SavageMusic correspondentImage source,Getty ImagesImage caption,Ozzy Osbourne and Lemmy Kilmister share a private moment backstage in 1981Metal band band Motörhead have posted a photo of Osbourne and their late frontman Lemmy on social media, along with a tribute.“We lost our dear friend today today,"they wrote in a caption,external. "Ozzy was a pioneer, a guiding force for all in hard rock and metal, and a great guy too.“Lemmy and Ozzy were brothers in arms who enjoyed many adventures together, and his loss is seismic. RIP Ozzy, we will always love and celebrate you."The two frontmen were great friends - and fellow hellraisers - who co-wrote several songs together, including I Don’t Want to Change the World, Mama, I’m Coming Home, Hellraiser and I Ain’t No Nice Guy.Speaking in 2021, Osbourne recalled his final conversation with Lemmy, shortly before the musician died of pancreatic cancer."His exact words were, ‘I could have lived a lot longer and taken care of myself, but I lived my life the way I want to live and I ain’t got no regrets’."Shareclose panelShare pageCopy linkAbout sharing
8. Mark SavageMusic correspondentImage source,ReutersThose of us who watched The Osbournes - Ozzy's pioneering reality TV show - will remember the star as a permanently-bewildered father of three, with a halting walk and a hunched posture.Although fans were concerned for his wellbeing, the beginning of his health problems really began in 2003, when he crashed an all-terrain vehicle damaging his spine.The injury was exacerbated by a late-night fall in 2019 that required several rounds of extensive surgery.Osbourne later suggested the fall could have been an early indication of Parkinson's, which he was diagnosed with later the same year.The condition eventually robbed him of the ability to walk but, speaking earlier this year, he put a positive spin on his deteriorating health.“I have made it to 2025. I can’t walk, but you know what I was thinking over the holidays? For all my complaining, I’m still alive,” he told the US rock radio station Ozzy's Boneyard."I may be moaning that I can’t walk, but I look down the road, and there’s people that didn’t do half as much as me and didn’t make it."Shareclose panelShare pageCopy linkAbout sharing
9. Peter GillibrandBBC NewsbeatImage source,Jessica OsborneImage caption,Jessica and her family say they’re devastated by Ozzy’s deathJessica Osborne and her family are self-proclaimed “metal heads” and she tells BBC Newsbeat they were all devastated.“It’s strange to feel so strongly about someone that you don't
personally know,” she says."I think you'd struggle to find someone that didn't know who he was," Jessica adds.Quote MessageMany bands were created because of his influence."Black Sabbath fan JessicaJessica comes from Wolverhampton and says “it adds to the emotion” that Ozzy Osbourne was a local lad.She was also at Black Sabbath's Back to the Beginning concert earlier this month, which saw Ozzy sat on a throne in his home city of Birmingham. She felt it was his last hurrah.“To know that was towards the end of his life. It’s very emotional to think about it. Especially now to say that I was there.”“For Ozzy to witness everybody around the world… you know, that outpouring of love from the crowd and from the world. How amazing must that have been for him?”Shareclose panelShare pageCopy linkAbout sharing
10. Helen BushbyCulture reporter## To play this video you need to enable JavaScript in your browser.This video can not be playedMedia caption,Watch: Ozzy Osbourne shares his views on fame and reality TVThe singer was famously captured from all angles on MTV reality TV show The Osbournes. While it was entertaining for millions, it was not always entirely flattering.He was often seen swearing, muttering and bumbling around his house as he was filmed with his wife Sharon, and two of his three children - Jack and Kelly. Their third daughter, Aimee, chose not to take part.But as for the fame that resulted from the show's success, he wasn't keen."I didn't like it because it got too crazy," he told the BBC in 2017."I remember stopping at McDonald's with my kids one day and it turned into a lunatic asylum."But that is a level of fame you cannot sustain," he added. "It's like people started chipping at you, you know. With that reality thing, people would come up to me and give me advice on how to take care of my dogs and people would start yelling at me."It's weird. You become a prisoner of your own success but it's all part of the trip."Shareclose panelShare pageCopy linkAbout sharing
11. Image source,Getty ImagesIn our previous post we brought you a tribute to Ozzy from Black Sabbath's co-founder Tony Iommi, now we're hearing from the band's bassist.Terence “Geezer” Butler says he is “so glad” he was able to perform a final time with bandmate Ozzy Osbourne - referring to the band's reunion on July 5 at Villa Park in Birmingham.In a social media post, Butler writes: “Goodbye dear friend – thanks for all those years- we had some great fun. Four kids from Aston- who’d have thought, eh?“So glad we got to do it one last time, back in Aston. Love you.”Shareclose panelShare pageCopy linkAbout sharing
12. Image source,Getty ImagesImage caption,Geezer Butler, Tony Iommi, Bill Ward and Ozzy Osbourne pose for photo in 1970Black Sabbath co-founder Tony Iommi says "I just can’t believe it! My dear dear friend Ozzy has passed away only weeks after our show at Villa Park".He adds that Ozzy's death is "such heart-breaking news that I can’t really find the words... Geezer (Butler), Bill (Ward) and myself have lost our brother."My thoughts go out to Sharon and all the Osbourne family. Rest in peace Oz. Tony.”Quote MessageThere won’t ever be another like him."Tony IommiShareclose panelShare pageCopy linkAbout sharing
13. Donna Ford and Sue Peters were in The Old Still pub in Wolverhampton when they heard the news of Ozzy Osbourne's death.They said the pub stopped the karaoke, played the Black Sabbath song Changes and held a minute's silence, with everybody raising a glass.They've just bought some flowers and brought them down to the pub.Shareclose panelShare pageCopy linkAbout sharing
14. MTV, where reality TV show The Osbournes aired, has sent condolences to Ozzy's "family, loved ones and many dedicated fans"."We know his legacy will live on through music-lovers around the world," the post on Instagram reads.Shareclose panelShare pageCopy linkAbout sharing
15. Image source,Getty ImagesOsbourne has had many aliases over the years, but one that has been the most longstanding is the "Prince of Darkness".It is another name for the devil used in works like "Paradise Lost" but the nickname was started by fans after the release of some of his "scarier" songs.In an interview with NME in 2016, Osbourne said the song "Black Sabbath" originally freaked out some concert attendees."They thought we were Satan’s [expletive] friends or something," Osbourne said. "That’s when the whole Prince of Darkness [expletive] started."Shareclose panelShare pageCopy linkAbout sharing
16. Image source,Getty ImagesImage caption,Brian May presenting Ozzy with the induction award for Black Sabbath on stage at the live final of the UK Music Hall Of Fame in 2005Queen guitarist Sir Brian May has paid tribute to Osbourne, posting on social media about the singer's last performance.“So sad to hear of Ozzy's passing. His last appearance at Villa Park was a glorious way to say goodbye – the love in that place for him was gigantic."May said he was "grateful" that he was able to have "a few quiet words" with Osbourne after the show, and happy to know he passed peacefully with his loving family close by.“But the world will miss Ozzy’s unique presence and fearless talent. My heartfelt consolations to Sharon and their great family.“And to Bill (Ward) and Geezer (Butler) and my dear friend Tony (Iommi) – for this is family – I know only too well. REST IN PEACE dear Ozzie. Bri.”Shareclose panelShare pageCopy linkAbout sharing
17. Helen BushbyCulture reporterImage source,Getty ImagesOzzy Osbourne was inducted as a solo artist into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame just last year, having been given the same honour in 2006 as part of Black Sabbath.His place in the metal scene was secured many years ago, after the band's early success, and Ben Reidy wrote about their importance inHeadbangers Haven,external."Metal music has become like a tree, with multiple branches representing the different areas and sounds that the genre can supply. Yet it all originated with these four men from Birmingham," he said.""There are very few cases where one band has been responsible for pioneering an entire genre by themselves. You would have thought that with time, fresher and newer Metal acts would take over and become more popular, but despite Sabbath’s retirement, the band remains as one of the most popular Metal bands to this day."He said their influence, stemming mostly from their first five albums, has "stood the test of time"."Ozzy Osbourne’s vocal style and skill was an integral part to what made Black Sabbath so successful," he added.Shareclose panelShare pageCopy linkAbout sharing
18. In Birmingham, where Ozzy Osbourne was born and Black Sabbath formed, people have been placing flowers on a bench in his memory.As we mentioned earlier, heplayed Black Sabbath's farewell gig in the city on 5 July.Shareclose panelShare pageCopy linkAbout sharing
19. Mark SavageMusic correspondentImage source,Getty ImagesImage caption,Ozzy Osbourne said at his final gig: "You have no idea how I feel. Thank you from the bottom of my heart"As frontman of Black Sabbath, Ozzy Osbourne is credited with inventing heavy metal, thanks to songs like Iron Man and Paranoid.Less than three weeks ago, the self-styled "Prince of Darkness" performed a farewell concert in his hometown, supported by many of the musicians he had inspired, including Metallica and Guns ‘n’ Roses.Born John Michael Osbourne, he dropped out of school aged 15, holding several low-paid jobs and spending a short spell in prison for burglary before embarking on his musical career.After singing with several local bands, he joined Black Sabbath alongside guitarist Tony Iommi, bassist Geezer Butler, and drummer Bill Ward in the late 1960s.They developed a unique sound, inspired by the blues but slower, louder and more sinister - with frequent references to the occult.* You canread on in my news storyShareclose panelShare pageCopy linkAbout sharing
20. Image source,ReutersTributes to Ozzy Osbourne are continuing to come in from around the world.David Beckhamsaid he was "so sad to see Ozzy leave us. Thank you for entertaining us. Sending love to Sharon, the kids & the family".Rod Stewartsaid: "Bye, bye Ozzy. Sleep well, my friend. I'll see you up there - later rather than sooner".UK Justice
Secretary Shabana Mahmood, MP in Osbourne’s home city of Birmingham, said Osbourne was "one of the greatest gifts my city gave the world. My thoughts are with his family. In Ozzy’s own words: Birmingham forever".Journalist and media personality Piers Morgandescribed Osbourne as "one of the greatest rock stars in history and a wonderful character. Truly one of the funniest people I’ve ever known".Boxer Frank Brunosaid Osbourne was "a character, a funny man and a legend who we will not see the likes of ever again".Shareclose panelShare pageCopy linkAbout sharing
