---
title: D-squared Digest -- FOR bigger pies and shorter hours and AGAINST more or less everything else
url: https://blog.danieldavies.com/2004/05/d-squared-digest-one-minute-mba.html
site_name: hnrss
content_file: hnrss-d-squared-digest-for-bigger-pies-and-shorter-hours
fetched_at: '2026-04-03T11:19:15.315657'
original_url: https://blog.danieldavies.com/2004/05/d-squared-digest-one-minute-mba.html
date: '2026-04-02'
description: Good ideas do not need lots of lies in order to gain public acceptance (2008)
tags:
- hackernews
- hnrss
---

# Economics and similar, for the sleep-deprived

A subtle change has been made to the comments links, so they no longer pop up. Does this in any way help with the problem about comments not appearing on permalinked posts, readers?Update:seemingly notUpdate:Oh yeah!### Thursday, May 27, 2004Update, September 2008. Hullo therePaul Krugman readers. Yes, I did say "Good ideas do not need lots of lies told about them in order to gain public acceptance", and as a general maxim I wholeheartedly recommend it. I don't necessarily, however, either endorse or whatever-the-opposite-of-endorse the specific use of that maxim in the context of Prof. Krugman's post about the Paulson bailout plan; I don't actually have a fully formed view about that plan. I do, however, wholeheartedly endorse "Development, Geography and Economic Theory", which I think is a terribly underrated economics book, and am at this moment rather starstruck at having one of my essays admired by the nearest modern equivalent to my hero JK Galbraith. Anyway, as you were; by way of context, the post below was written just as a lot of high-profile commentators like Thomas Friedman were abandoning their support for the Iraq War.The D-Squared Digest One Minute MBA - Avoiding Projects Pursued By Morons 101Literally people have been asking me: "How is it that you were so amazingly prescient about Iraq? Why is it that you were right about everything atprecisely the same momentwhen we were wrong?" No honestly, they have. I'd love to show you the emails I've received, there were dozens of them, honest.Honest. Anyway, I note that "errors of prewar planning" is now pretty much amainstreamstylised fact, so I suspect that it might make some small contribution to the commonweal if I were to explain how it was that I was able to spot so early that this dog wasn't going to hunt. I will struggle manfully with the savage burden of boasting, self-aggrandisement and ego-stroking that this will necessarily involve.It's been done before, although admittedly by a madman in the process of dying of syphilis of the brain. Sorry, where was I?Anyway, the secret to every analysis I've ever done of contemporary politics has been, more or less, my expensive business school education (I would write a book entitled "Everything I Know I Learned At A Very Expensive University", but I doubt it would sell). About half of what they say about business schools and their graduates is probably true, and they do often feel like the most collossal waste of time and money, but they occasionally teach you the odd thing which is very useful indeed. Here's a few of the ones I learned which I considered relevant to judging the advisability of the Second Iraq War.Good ideas do not need lots of lies told about them in order to gain public acceptance.I was first made aware of this during an accounting class. We were discussing the subject of accounting for stock options at technology companies. There was a live debate on this subject at the time. One side (mainly technology companies and their lobbyists) held that stock option grants should not be treated as an expense on public policy grounds; treating them as an expense would discourage companies from granting them, and stock options were a vital compensation tool that incentivised performance, rewarded dynamism and innovation and created vast amounts of value for America and the world. The other side (mainly people like Warren Buffet) held that stock options looked awfully like a massive blag carried out my management at the expense of shareholders, and that the proper place to record such blags was the P&L account.Our lecturer, in summing up the debate, made the not unreasonable point that if stock options really were a fantastic tool which unleashed the creative power in every employee, everyone wouldwantto expense as many of them as possible, the better to boast about how innovative, empowered and fantastic they were. Since the tech companies' point of view appeared to be that if they were ever forced to account honestly for their option grants, they would quickly stop making them, this offered decentprima facieevidence that they weren't, really, all that fantastic.Application to Iraq. The general principle that good ideas are not usually associated with lying like a rug1about their true nature seems to have been pretty well confirmed. In particular, however, this principle sheds light on the now quite popular claim that "WMDs were only part of the story; the real priority was to liberate the Iraqis, which is something that every decent person would support".Fibbers' forecasts are worthless. Case after miserable case after bloody case we went through, I tell you, all of which had this moral. Not only that people who want a project will tend to make innacurate projections about the possible outcomes of that project, but about the futility of attempts to "shade" downward a fundamentally dishonest set of predictions. If you have doubts about the integrity of a forecaster, you can't use their forecastsat all. Not even as a "starting point". By the way, I would just love to get hold of a few of the quantitative numbers from documents prepared to support the war and give them a quick run throughBenford's Law.Application to IraqThis was how I decided that it was worth staking a bit of credibility on the strong claim that absolutely no material WMD capacity would be found, rather than "some" or "some but not enough to justify a war" or even "some derisory but not immaterial capacity, like a few mobile biological weapons labs". My reasoning was that Powell, Bush, Straw, etc, were clearly making false claims and therefore ought to be discounted completely, and that there were actually very few people who knew a bit about Iraq but were not fatally compromised in this manner who were making the WMD claim. Meanwhile, there were people like Scott Ritter andAndrew Wilkiewho, whatever other faults they might or might not have had, did not appear to have told any provable lies on this subject and were therefore not compromised.The Vital Importance of Audit. Emphasised over and over again. Brealey and Myers has a section on this, in which they remind callow students that like backing-up one's computer files, this is a lesson that everyone seems to have to learn the hard way. Basically, it's been shown time and again and again; companies which do not audit completed projects in order to see how accurate the original projections were, tend to get exactly the forecasts and projects that they deserve. Companies which have a culture where there are no consequences for making dishonest forecasts, get the projects they deserve. Companies which allocate blank cheques to management teams with a proven record of failure and mendacity, get what they deserve.I hope I don't have to spell out the implications of this one for Iraq.Krugmanhas gone on and on about this, seemingly with some small effect these days. The raspberry road that led to Abu Ghraib was paved with bland assumptions that people who had repeatedly proved their untrustworthiness, could be trusted. There is much made by people who long for the days of their fourth form debating society about the fallacy of "argumentum ad hominem". There is, as I have mentioned in the past, no fancy Latin term for the fallacy of "giving known liars the benefit of the doubt", but it is in my view a much greater source of avoidable error in the world. Audit is meant to protect us from this, which is why audit is so important.And so the lesson ends. Next week, perhaps, a few reflections on why it is that people don't support the neoconservative project to bring democracy to the Middle East (a trailer for those who can't wait; the title is going to be something like "If You Tell Lies A Lot, You Tend To Get A Reputation As A Liar"). Mind how you go.1We also learned in accounting class that the difference between "making a definite single false claim with provable intent to deceive" and "creating a very false impression and allowing it to remain without correcting it" is not one that you should rely upon to keep you out of jail. Even if your motives are noble.18 commentsthis item posted by the management5/27/2004 11:57:00 PM

Links:

Bitch : LabAaronovitch WatchBalkanalysisPerfect.co.ukMaxspeakBrad DelongThe Robert Vienneau blogPolitical and philosophical heroesSubcomandante MarcosWill RogersBoris VianThe English SvejkRSS Feed:This seems to matter to a lot of peopleIf you liked this "Daniel Davies" website, you might be interested in"Danux", the web developerThe martial artist (and fan ofextremelyannoying Flash intros) from BlackburnThe Welsh political journalistA Scouse computer programmer who collects Soviet cameras"Danimal", the heavy metal drummerCanada's finest recorder of radio jinglesMore of the same, at the GuardianA tailor's in Lampeter where Jimmy Carter once bought a hatAn advertising man who has written a novel about dogging (I think we sometimes get each other's email)An award-winning facilities manager in DubaiThe son of the guitarist from the KinksUpdate:he isapparently"balls-out motherfucking shit-dicked exxxstatic" to be included on a Kerrang magazine giveaway CD of Iron Maiden covers, which is nice."Fritz Gretel" from the Ramones film "Rock 'n' Roll High School"The former presenter of the leading politics talk radio show on the Isle of Man, now a business change manager in the Manx government secretary's officeAn aquarium curator in Sussex who keeps on scoring home runs like this (this is the first stable link I've found, but he is constantly kicking ass in acquarial terms)If you didn't like this "Daniel Davies" website, then don't give up on the Daniel Davies industry completely!An American "Christian Political Analyst" who has the same name as meA student at Patrick Henry Collegethese two might be the same guy ..."Scatter", the deceased Liberian gangsterA naked man stuck in a chimney in WiganA thug in BarrowThis blog has been going downhill since ...August 2002September 2002October 2002November 2002December 2002January 2003February 2003March 2003April 2003May 2003June 2003July 2003August 2003September 2003November 2003December 2003March 2004April 2004May 2004May 2005June 2005July 2005August 2005September 2005October 2005November 2005December 2005January 2006February 2006March 2006April 2006May 2006June 2006July 2006August 2006September 2006October 2006November 2006December 2006January 2007February 2007March 2007April 2007May 2007June 2007July 2007August 2007September 2007October 2007November 2007December 2007January 2008February 2008March 2008April 2008May 2008June 2008July 2008August 2008September 2008October 2008November 2008December 2008January 2009February 2009March 2009April 2009May 2009June 2009July 2009August 2009September 2009October 2009November 2009December 2009January 2010February 2010March 2010April 2010May 2010June 2010July 2010August 2010September 2010October 2010November 2010December 2010January 2011February 2011March 2011April 2011May 2011June 2011July 2011August 2011September 2011October 2011November 2011December 2011January 2012February 2012March 2012April 2012May 2012June 2012July 2012August 2012September 2012October 2012December 2012February 2013April 2013June 2013July 2013August 2013March 2014April 2014August 2014October 2015March 2023
